Figure 1.1 Distant Galaxies. These two interacting islands of stars (galaxies) are so far away that their light takes hundreds of
millions of years to reach us on Earth (photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope). (credit: modification of work by NASA, ESA,
the Hubble Heritage (STScl/AURA)-ESA/Hubble Collaboration, and K. Noll (STScl))
Chapter Outline
1.1 The Nature of Astronomy
1.2 The Nature of Science
1.3 The Laws of Nature
1.4 Numbers in Astronomy
1.5 Consequences of Light Travel Time
1.6 A Tour of the Universe
1.7 The Universe on the Large Scale
1.8 The Universe of the Very Small
1.9 A Conclusion and a Beginning
Introduction
We invite you to come along on a series of voyages to explore the universe as astronomers understand it
today. Beyond Earth are vast and magnificent realms full of objects that have no counterpart on our home
planet. Nevertheless, we hope to show you that the evolution of the universe has been directly responsible for
your presence on Earth today.
Along your journey, you will encounter:
•
a canyon system so large that, on Earth, it would stretch from Los Angeles to Washington, DC (Figure 1.2).
Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
1 • Introduction
Figure 1.2 Mars Mosaic. This image of Mars is centered on the Valles Marineris (Mariner Valley) complex of canyons, which is as
long as the United States is wide. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
•
a crater and other evidence on Earth that tell us that the dinosaurs (and many other creatures) died
because of a cosmic collision.
•
a tiny moon whose gravity is so weak that one good throw from its surface could put a baseball into orbit.
•
a collapsed star so dense that to duplicate its interior we would have to squeeze every human being on
Earth into a single raindrop.
•
exploding stars whose violent end could wipe clean all of the life-forms on a planet orbiting a neighboring
star (Figure 1.3).
•
a “cannibal galaxy” that has already consumed a number of its smaller galaxy neighbors and is not yet
finished finding new victims.
•
a radio echo that is the faint but unmistakable signal of the creation event for our universe.
Figure 1.3 Stellar Corpse. We observe the remains of a star that was seen to explode in our skies in 1054 (and was, briefly, bright
enough to be visible during the daytime). Today, the remnant is called the Crab Nebula and its central region is seen here. Such
exploding stars are crucial to the development of life in the universe. (credit: NASA, ESA, J. Hester (Arizona State University))
Such discoveries are what make astronomy such an exciting field for scientists and many others—but you will
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
explore much more than just the objects in our universe and the latest discoveries about them. We will pay
equal attention to the process by which we have come to understand the realms beyond Earth and the tools
we use to increase that understanding.
We gather information about the cosmos from the messages the universe sends our way. Because the stars
are the fundamental building blocks of the universe, decoding the message of starlight has been a central
challenge and triumph of modern astronomy. By the time you have finished reading this text, you will know a
bit about how to read that message and how to understand what it is telling us.
1.1
The Nature of Astronomy
Astronomy is defined as the study of the objects that lie beyond our planet Earth and the processes by which
these objects interact with one another. We will see, though, that it is much more. It is also humanity’s attempt
to organize what we learn into a clear history of the universe, from the instant of its birth in the Big Bang to
the present moment. Throughout this book, we emphasize that science is a progress report—one that
changes constantly as new techniques and instruments allow us to probe the universe more deeply.
In considering the history of the universe, we will see again and again that the cosmos evolves; it changes in
profound ways over long periods of time. For example, the universe made the carbon, the calcium, and the
oxygen necessary to construct something as interesting and complicated as you. Today, many billions of years
later, the universe has evolved into a more hospitable place for life. Tracing the evolutionary processes that
continue to shape the universe is one of the most important (and satisfying) parts of modern astronomy.
1.2
The Nature of Science
The ultimate judge in science is always what nature itself reveals based on observations, experiments, models,
and testing. Science is not merely a body of knowledge, but a method by which we attempt to understand
nature and how it behaves. This method begins with many observations over a period of time. From the trends
found through observations, scientists can model the particular phenomena we want to understand. Such
models are always approximations of nature, subject to further testing.
As a concrete astronomical example, ancient astronomers constructed a model (partly from observations and
partly from philosophical beliefs) that Earth was the center of the universe and everything moved around it in
circular orbits. At first, our available observations of the Sun, Moon, and planets did fit this model; however,
after further observations, the model had to be updated by adding circle after circle to represent the
movements of the planets around Earth at the center. As the centuries passed and improved instruments were
developed for keeping track of objects in the sky, the old model (even with a huge number of circles) could no
longer explain all the observed facts. As we will see in the chapter on Observing the Sky: The Birth of
Astronomy, a new model, with the Sun at the center, fit the experimental evidence better. After a period of
philosophical struggle, it became accepted as our view of the universe.
When they are first proposed, new models or ideas are sometimes called hypotheses. You may think there can
be no new hypotheses in a science such as astronomy—that everything important has already been learned.
Nothing could be further from the truth. Throughout this textbook you will find discussions of recent, and
occasionally still controversial, hypotheses in astronomy. For example, the significance that the huge chunks of
rock and ice that hit Earth have for life on Earth itself is still debated. And while the evidence is strong that vast
quantities of invisible “dark energy” make up the bulk of the universe, scientists have no convincing
explanation for what the dark energy actually is. Resolving these issues will require difficult observations done
at the forefront of our technology, and all such hypotheses need further testing before we incorporate them
fully into our standard astronomical models.
This last point is crucial: a hypothesis must be a proposed explanation that can be tested. The most
straightforward approach to such testing in science is to perform an experiment. If the experiment is
1.1 • The Nature of Astronomy
conducted properly, its results either will agree with the predictions of the hypothesis or they will contradict it.
If the experimental result is truly inconsistent with the hypothesis, a scientist must discard the hypothesis and
try to develop an alternative. If the experimental result agrees with predictions, this does not necessarily prove
that the hypothesis is absolutely correct; perhaps later experiments will contradict crucial parts of the
hypothesis. But, the more experiments that agree with the hypothesis, the more likely we are to accept the
hypothesis as a useful description of nature.
One way to think about this is to consider a scientist who was born and lives on an island where only black
sheep live. Day after day the scientist encounters black sheep only, so he or she hypothesizes that all sheep
are black. Although every observed sheep adds confidence to the hypothesis, the scientist only has to visit the
mainland and observe one white sheep to prove the hypothesis wrong.
When you read about experiments, you probably have a mental picture of a scientist in a laboratory
conducting tests or taking careful measurements. This is certainly the case for a biologist or a chemist, but
what can astronomers do when our laboratory is the universe? It’s impossible to put a group of stars into a
test tube or to order another comet from a scientific supply company.
As a result, astronomy is sometimes called an observational science; we often make our tests by observing
many samples of the kind of object we want to study and noting carefully how different samples vary. New
instruments and technology can let us look at astronomical objects from new perspectives and in greater
detail. Our hypotheses are then judged in the light of this new information, and they pass or fail in the same
way we would evaluate the result of a laboratory experiment.
Much of astronomy is also a historical science—meaning that what we observe has already happened in the
universe and we can do nothing to change it. In the same way, a geologist cannot alter what has happened to
our planet, and a paleontologist cannot bring an ancient animal back to life. While this can make astronomy
challenging, it also gives us fascinating opportunities to discover the secrets of our cosmic past.
You might compare an astronomer to a detective trying to solve a crime that occurred before the detective
arrived at the scene. There is lots of evidence, but both the detective and the scientist must sift through and
organize the evidence to test various hypotheses about what actually happened. And there is another way in
which the scientist is like a detective: they both must prove their case. The detective must convince the district
attorney, the judge, and perhaps ultimately the jury that his hypothesis is correct. Similarly, the scientist must
convince colleagues, editors of journals, and ultimately a broad cross-section of other scientists that her
hypothesis is provisionally correct. In both cases, one can only ask for evidence “beyond a reasonable doubt.”
And sometimes new evidence will force both the detective and the scientist to revise their last hypothesis.
This self-correcting aspect of science sets it off from most human activities. Scientists spend a great deal of
time questioning and challenging one another, which is why applications for project funding—as well as
reports for publication in academic journals—go through an extensive process of peer review, which is a
careful examination by other scientists in the same field. In science (after formal education and training),
everyone is encouraged to improve upon experiments and to challenge any and all hypotheses. New scientists
know that one of the best ways to advance their careers is to find a weakness in our current understanding of
something and to correct it with a new or modified hypothesis.
This is one of the reasons science has made such dramatic progress. An undergraduate science major today
knows more about science and math than did Sir Isaac Newton, one of the most renowned scientists who ever
lived. Even in this introductory astronomy course, you will learn about objects and processes that no one a few
generations ago even dreamed existed.
1.3
The Laws of Nature
Over centuries scientists have extracted various scientific laws from countless observations, hypotheses, and
experiments. These scientific laws are, in a sense, the “rules” of the game that nature plays. One remarkable
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
discovery about nature—one that underlies everything you will read about in this text—is that the same laws
apply everywhere in the universe. The rules that determine the motion of stars so far away that your eye
cannot see them are the same laws that determine the arc of a baseball after a batter has hit it out of the park.
Note that without the existence of such universal laws, we could not make much headway in astronomy. If
each pocket of the universe had different rules, we would have little chance of interpreting what happened in
other “neighborhoods.” But, the consistency of the laws of nature gives us enormous power to understand
distant objects without traveling to them and learning the local laws. In the same way, if every region of a
country had completely different laws, it would be very difficult to carry out commerce or even to understand
the behavior of people in those different regions. A consistent set of laws, though, allows us to apply what we
learn or practice in one state to any other state.
This is not to say that our current scientific models and laws cannot change. New experiments and
observations can lead to new, more sophisticated models—models that can include new phenomena and laws
about their behavior. The general theory of relativity proposed by Albert Einstein is a perfect example of such a
transformation that took place about a century ago; it led us to predict, and eventually to observe, a strange
new class of objects that astronomers call black holes. Only the patient process of observing nature ever more
carefully and precisely can demonstrate the validity of such new scientific models.
One important problem in describing scientific models has to do with the limitations of language. When we try
to describe complex phenomena in everyday terms, the words themselves may not be adequate to do the job.
For example, you may have heard the structure of the atom likened to a miniature solar system. While some
aspects of our modern model of the atom do remind us of planetary orbits, many other of its aspects are
fundamentally different.
This problem is the reason scientists often prefer to describe their models using equations rather than words.
In this book, which is designed to introduce the field of astronomy, we use mainly words to discuss what
scientists have learned. We avoid complex math, but if this course piques your interest and you go on in
science, more and more of your studies will involve the precise language of mathematics.
1.4
Numbers in Astronomy
In astronomy we deal with distances on a scale you may never have thought about before, with numbers
larger than any you may have encountered. We adopt two approaches that make dealing with astronomical
numbers a little bit easier. First, we use a system for writing large and small numbers called scientific notation
(or sometimes powers-of-ten notation). This system is very appealing because it eliminates the many zeros
that can seem overwhelming to the reader. In scientific notation, if you want to write a number such as
500,000,000, you express it as
. The small raised number after the 10, called an exponent, keeps track of
the number of places we had to move the decimal point to the left to convert 500,000,000 to 5. If you are
encountering this system for the first time or would like a refresher, we suggest you look at Appendix C and
Example 1.1 for more information. The second way we try to keep numbers simple is to use a consistent set of
units—the metric International System of Units, or SI (from the French Système International d’Unités). The
metric system is summarized in Appendix D (see Example 1.2).
Watch this brief PBS animation (https://openstax.org/l/30scinotation) that explains how scientific notation
works and why it’s useful.
A common unit astronomers use to describe distances in the universe is a light-year, which is the distance light
LINK TO LEARNING
1.4 • Numbers in Astronomy
travels during one year. Because light always travels at the same speed, and because its speed turns out to be
the fastest possible speed in the universe, it makes a good standard for keeping track of distances. You might
be confused because a “light-year” seems to imply that we are measuring time, but this mix-up of time and
distance is common in everyday life as well. For example, when your friend asks where the movie theater is
located, you might say “about 20 minutes from downtown.”
So, how many kilometers are there in a light-year? Light travels at the amazing pace of
kilometers per
second (km/s), which makes a light-year
kilometers. You might think that such a large unit would
reach the nearest star easily, but the stars are far more remote than our imaginations might lead us to believe.
Even the nearest star is 4.3 light-years away—more than 40 trillion kilometers. Other stars visible to the
unaided eye are hundreds to thousands of light-years away (Figure 1.4).
Figure 1.4 Orion Nebula. This beautiful cloud of cosmic raw material (gas and dust from which new stars and planets are being
made) called the Orion Nebula is about 1400 light-years away. That’s a distance of roughly
kilometers—a pretty big
number. The gas and dust in this region are illuminated by the intense light from a few extremely energetic adolescent stars. (credit:
NASA, ESA, M. Robberto (Space Telescope Science Institute/ESA) and the Hubble Space Telescope Orion Treasury Project Team)
E X A M P L E 1 . 1
Scientific Notation
In 2015, the richest human being on our planet had a net worth of $79.2 billion. Some might say this is an
astronomical sum of money. Express this amount in scientific notation.
Solution
$79.2 billion can be written $79,200,000,000. Expressed in scientific notation it becomes
E X A M P L E 1 . 2
Getting Familiar with a Light-Year
How many kilometers are there in a light-year?
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
Solution
Light travels
km in 1 s. So, let’s calculate how far it goes in a year:
•
There are 60 (
) s in 1 min, and
min in 1 h.
•
Multiply these together and you find that there are
s/h.
•
Thus, light covers
•
There are 24 or
h in a day, and 365.25 (
) days in 1 y.
•
The product of these two numbers is
h/y.
•
Multiplying this by
km/h gives
km/light-year.
That’s almost 10,000,000,000,000 km that light covers in a year. To help you imagine how long this distance
is, we’ll mention that a string 1 light-year long could fit around the circumference of Earth 236 million times.
1.5
Consequences of Light Travel Time
There is another reason the speed of light is such a natural unit of distance for astronomers. Information
about the universe comes to us almost exclusively through various forms of light, and all such light travels at
the speed of light—that is, 1 light-year every year. This sets a limit on how quickly we can learn about events in
the universe. If a star is 100 light-years away, the light we see from it tonight left that star 100 years ago and is
just now arriving in our neighborhood. The soonest we can learn about any changes in that star is 100 years
after the fact. For a star 500 light-years away, the light we detect tonight left 500 years ago and is carrying
500-year-old news.
Because many of us are accustomed to instant news from the Internet, some might find this frustrating.
“You mean, when I see that star up there,” you ask, “I won’t know what’s actually happening there for another
500 years?”
But this isn’t the most helpful way to think about the situation. For astronomers, now is when the light reaches
us here on Earth. There is no way for us to know anything about that star (or other object) until its light
reaches us.
But what at first may seem a great frustration is actually a tremendous benefit in disguise. If astronomers
really want to piece together what has happened in the universe since its beginning, they must find evidence
about each epoch (or period of time) of the past. Where can we find evidence today about cosmic events that
occurred billions of years ago?
The delay in the arrival of light provides an answer to this question. The farther out in space we look, the
longer the light has taken to get here, and the longer ago it left its place of origin. By looking billions of lightyears out into space, astronomers are actually seeing billions of years into the past. In this way, we can
reconstruct the history of the cosmos and get a sense of how it has evolved over time.
This is one reason why astronomers strive to build telescopes that can collect more and more of the faint light
in the universe. The more light we collect, the fainter the objects we can observe. On average, fainter objects
are farther away and can, therefore, tell us about periods of time even deeper in the past. Instruments such as
the Hubble Space Telescope (Figure 1.5) and the Very Large Telescope in Chile (which you will learn about in
the chapter on Astronomical Instruments), are giving astronomers views of deep space and deep time better
than any we have had before.
1.5 • Consequences of Light Travel Time
Figure 1.5 Telescope in Orbit. The Hubble Space Telescope, shown here in orbit around Earth, is one of many astronomical
instruments in space. (credit: modification of work by European Space Agency)
1.6
A Tour of the Universe
We can now take a brief introductory tour of the universe as astronomers understand it today to get
acquainted with the types of objects and distances you will encounter throughout the text. We begin at home
with Earth, a nearly spherical planet about 13,000 kilometers in diameter (Figure 1.6). A space traveler entering
our planetary system would easily distinguish Earth from the other planets in our solar system by the large
amount of liquid water that covers some two thirds of its crust. If the traveler had equipment to receive radio
or television signals, or came close enough to see the lights of our cities at night, she would soon find signs
that this watery planet has sentient life.
Figure 1.6 Humanity’s Home Base. This image shows the Western hemisphere as viewed from space 35,400 kilometers (about
22,000 miles) above Earth. Data about the land surface from one satellite was combined with another satellite’s data about the
clouds to create the image. (credit: modification of work by R. Stockli, A. Nelson, F. Hasler, NASA/ GSFC/ NOAA/ USGS)
Our nearest astronomical neighbor is Earth’s satellite, commonly called the Moon. Figure 1.7 shows Earth and
the Moon drawn to scale on the same diagram. Notice how small we have to make these bodies to fit them on
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
the page with the right scale. The Moon’s distance from Earth is about 30 times Earth’s diameter, or
approximately 384,000 kilometers, and it takes about a month for the Moon to revolve around Earth. The
Moon’s diameter is 3476 kilometers, about one fourth the size of Earth.
Figure 1.7 Earth and Moon, Drawn to Scale. This image shows Earth and the Moon shown to scale for both size and distance.
(credit: modification of work by NASA)
Light (or radio waves) takes 1.3 seconds to travel between Earth and the Moon. If you’ve seen videos of the
Apollo flights to the Moon, you may recall that there was a delay of about 3 seconds between the time Mission
Control asked a question and the time the astronauts responded. This was not because the astronauts were
thinking slowly, but rather because it took the radio waves almost 3 seconds to make the round trip.
Earth revolves around our star, the Sun, which is about 150 million kilometers away—approximately 400 times
as far away from us as the Moon. We call the average Earth–Sun distance an astronomical unit (AU) because,
in the early days of astronomy, it was the most important measuring standard. Light takes slightly more than 8
minutes to travel 1 astronomical unit, which means the latest news we receive from the Sun is always 8
minutes old. The diameter of the Sun is about 1.5 million kilometers; Earth could fit comfortably inside one of
the minor eruptions that occurs on the surface of our star. If the Sun were reduced to the size of a basketball,
Earth would be a small apple seed about 30 meters from the ball.
It takes Earth 1 year (3 × 107 seconds) to go around the Sun at our distance; to make it around, we must travel
at approximately 110,000 kilometers per hour. (If you, like many students, still prefer miles to kilometers, you
might find the following trick helpful. To convert kilometers to miles, just multiply kilometers by 0.6. Thus,
110,000 kilometers per hour becomes 66,000 miles per hour.) Because gravity holds us firmly to Earth and
there is no resistance to Earth’s motion in the vacuum of space, we participate in this extremely fast-moving
trip without being aware of it day to day.
Earth is only one of eight planets that revolve around the Sun. These planets, along with their moons and
swarms of smaller bodies such as dwarf planets, make up the solar system (Figure 1.8). A planet is defined as a
body of significant size that orbits a star and does not produce its own light. (If a large body consistently
produces its own light, it is then called a star.) Later in the book this definition will be modified a bit, but it is
perfectly fine for now as you begin your voyage.
1.6 • A Tour of the Universe
Figure 1.8 Our Solar Family. The Sun, the planets, and some dwarf planets are shown with their sizes drawn to scale. The orbits of
the planets are much more widely separated than shown in this drawing. Notice the size of Earth compared to the giant planets.
(credit: modification of work by NASA)
We are able to see the nearby planets in our skies only because they reflect the light of our local star, the Sun.
If the planets were much farther away, the tiny amount of light they reflect would usually not be visible to us.
The planets we have so far discovered orbiting other stars were found from the pull their gravity exerts on
their parent stars, or from the light they block from their stars when they pass in front of them. We can’t see
most of these planets directly, although a few are now being imaged directly.
The Sun is our local star, and all the other stars are also enormous balls of glowing gas that generate vast
amounts of energy by nuclear reactions deep within. We will discuss the processes that cause stars to shine in
more detail later in the book. The other stars look faint only because they are so very far away. If we continue
our basketball analogy, Proxima Centauri, the nearest star beyond the Sun, which is 4.3 light-years away,
would be almost 7000 kilometers from the basketball.
When you look up at a star-filled sky on a clear night, all the stars visible to the unaided eye are part of a single
collection of stars we call the Milky Way Galaxy, or simply the Galaxy. (When referring to the Milky Way, we
capitalize Galaxy; when talking about other galaxies of stars, we use lowercase galaxy.) The Sun is one of
hundreds of billions of stars that make up the Galaxy; its extent, as we will see, staggers the human
imagination. Within a sphere 10 light-years in radius centered on the Sun, we find roughly ten stars. Within a
sphere 100 light-years in radius, there are roughly 10,000 (104) stars—far too many to count or name—but we
have still traversed only a tiny part of the Milky Way Galaxy. Within a 1000-light-year sphere, we find some ten
million (107) stars; within a sphere of 100,000 light-years, we finally encompass the entire Milky Way Galaxy.
Our Galaxy looks like a giant disk with a small ball in the middle. If we could move outside our Galaxy and look
down on the disk of the Milky Way from above, it would probably resemble the galaxy in Figure 1.9, with its
spiral structure outlined by the blue light of hot adolescent stars.
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
Figure 1.9 Spiral Galaxy. This galaxy of billions of stars, called by its catalog number NGC 1073, is thought to be similar to our own
Milky Way Galaxy. Here we see the giant wheel-shaped system with a bar of stars across its middle. (credit: NASA, ESA)
The Sun is somewhat less than 30,000 light-years from the center of the Galaxy, in a location with nothing
much to distinguish it. From our position inside the Milky Way Galaxy, we cannot see through to its far rim (at
least not with ordinary light) because the space between the stars is not completely empty. It contains a
sparse distribution of gas (mostly the simplest element, hydrogen) intermixed with tiny solid particles that we
call interstellar dust. This gas and dust collect into enormous clouds in many places in the Galaxy, becoming
the raw material for future generations of stars. Figure 1.10 shows an image of the disk of the Galaxy as seen
from our vantage point.
1.6 • A Tour of the Universe
Figure 1.10 Milky Way Galaxy. Because we are inside the Milky Way Galaxy, we see its disk in cross-section flung across the sky like
a great milky white avenue of stars with dark “rifts” of dust. In this dramatic image, part of it is seen above Trona Pinnacles in the
California desert. (credit: Ian Norman)
Typically, the interstellar material is so extremely sparse that the space between stars is a much better vacuum
than anything we can produce in terrestrial laboratories. Yet, the dust in space, building up over thousands of
light-years, can block the light of more distant stars. Like the distant buildings that disappear from our view on
a smoggy day in Los Angeles, the more distant regions of the Milky Way cannot be seen behind the layers of
interstellar smog. Luckily, astronomers have found that stars and raw material shine with various forms of
light, some of which do penetrate the smog, and so we have been able to develop a pretty good map of the
Galaxy.
Recent observations, however, have also revealed a rather surprising and disturbing fact. There appears to be
more—much more—to the Galaxy than meets the eye (or the telescope). From various investigations, we have
evidence that much of our Galaxy is made of material we cannot currently observe directly with our
instruments. We therefore call this component of the Galaxy dark matter. We know the dark matter is there by
the pull its gravity exerts on the stars and raw material we can observe, but what this dark matter is made of
and how much of it exists remain a mystery. Furthermore, this dark matter is not confined to our Galaxy; it
appears to be an important part of other star groupings as well.
By the way, not all stars live by themselves, as the Sun does. Many are born in double or triple systems with
two, three, or more stars revolving about each other. Because the stars influence each other in such close
systems, multiple stars allow us to measure characteristics that we cannot discern from observing single stars.
In a number of places, enough stars have formed together that we recognized them as star clusters (Figure
1.11). Some of the largest of the star clusters that astronomers have cataloged contain hundreds of thousands
of stars and take up volumes of space hundreds of light-years across.
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
Figure 1.11 Star Cluster. This large star cluster is known by its catalog number, M9. It contains some 250,000 stars and is seen more
clearly from space using the Hubble Space Telescope. It is located roughly 25,000 light-years away. (credit: NASA, ESA)
You may hear stars referred to as “eternal,” but in fact no star can last forever. Since the “business” of stars is
making energy, and energy production requires some sort of fuel to be used up, eventually all stars run out of
fuel. This news should not cause you to panic, though, because our Sun still has at least 5 or 6 billion years to
go. Ultimately, the Sun and all stars will die, and it is in their death throes that some of the most intriguing and
important processes of the universe are revealed. For example, we now know that many of the atoms in our
bodies were once inside stars. These stars exploded at the ends of their lives, recycling their material back into
the reservoir of the Galaxy. In this sense, all of us are literally made of recycled “star dust.”
1.7
The Universe on the Large Scale
In a very rough sense, you could think of the solar system as your house or apartment and the Galaxy as your
town, made up of many houses and buildings. In the twentieth century, astronomers were able to show that,
just as our world is made up of many, many towns, so the universe is made up of enormous numbers of
galaxies. (We define the universe to be everything that exists that is accessible to our observations.) Galaxies
stretch as far into space as our telescopes can see, many billions of them within the reach of modern
instruments. When they were first discovered, some astronomers called galaxies island universes, and the
term is aptly descriptive; galaxies do look like islands of stars in the vast, dark seas of intergalactic space.
The nearest galaxy, discovered in 1993, is a small one that lies 70,000 light-years from the Sun in the direction
of the constellation Sagittarius, where the smog in our own Galaxy makes it especially difficult to discern. (A
constellation, we should note, is one of the 88 sections into which astronomers divide the sky, each named
after a prominent star pattern within it.) Beyond this Sagittarius dwarf galaxy lie two other small galaxies,
about 160,000 light-years away. First recorded by Magellan’s crew as he sailed around the world, these are
called the Magellanic Clouds (Figure 1.12). All three of these small galaxies are satellites of the Milky Way
Galaxy, interacting with it through the force of gravity. Ultimately, all three may even be swallowed by our
much larger Galaxy, as other small galaxies have been over the course of cosmic time.
1.7 • The Universe on the Large Scale
Figure 1.12 Neighbor Galaxies. This image shows both the Large Magellanic Cloud and the Small Magellanic Cloud above the
telescopes of the Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA) in the Atacama Desert of northern Chile. (credit: ESO, C.
Malin)
The nearest large galaxy is a spiral quite similar to our own, located in the constellation of Andromeda, and is
thus called the Andromeda galaxy; it is also known by one of its catalog numbers, M31 (Figure 1.13). M31 is a
little more than 2 million light-years away and, along with the Milky Way, is part of a small cluster of more than
50 galaxies referred to as the Local Group.
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
Figure 1.13 Closest Spiral Galaxy. The Andromeda galaxy (M31) is a spiral-shaped collection of stars similar to our own Milky Way.
(credit: Adam Evans)
At distances of 10 to 15 million light-years, we find other small galaxy groups, and then at about 50 million
light-years there are more impressive systems with thousands of member galaxies. We have discovered that
galaxies occur mostly in clusters, both large and small (Figure 1.14).
1.7 • The Universe on the Large Scale
Figure 1.14 Fornax Cluster of Galaxies. In this image, you can see part of a cluster of galaxies located about 60 million light-years
away in the constellation of Fornax. All the objects that are not pinpoints of light in the picture are galaxies of billions of stars. (credit:
ESO, J. Emerson, VISTA. Acknowledgment: Cambridge Astronomical Survey Unit)
Some of the clusters themselves form into larger groups called superclusters. The Local Group is part of a
supercluster of galaxies, called the Virgo Supercluster, which stretches over a diameter of 110 million lightyears. We are just beginning to explore the structure of the universe at these enormous scales and are already
encountering some unexpected findings.
At even greater distances, where many ordinary galaxies are too dim to see, we find quasars. These are
brilliant centers of galaxies, glowing with the light of an extraordinarily energetic process. The enormous
energy of the quasars is produced by gas that is heated to a temperature of millions of degrees as it falls
toward a massive black hole and swirls around it. The brilliance of quasars makes them the most distant
beacons we can see in the dark oceans of space. They allow us to probe the universe 10 billion light-years away
or more, and thus 10 billion years or more in the past.
With quasars we can see way back close to the Big Bang explosion that marks the beginning of time. Beyond
the quasars and the most distant visible galaxies, we have detected the feeble glow of the explosion itself,
filling the universe and thus coming to us from all directions in space. The discovery of this “afterglow of
creation” is considered to be one of the most significant events in twentieth-century science, and we are still
exploring the many things it has to tell us about the earliest times of the universe.
Measurements of the properties of galaxies and quasars in remote locations require large telescopes,
sophisticated light-amplifying devices, and painstaking labor. Every clear night, at observatories around the
world, astronomers and students are at work on such mysteries as the birth of new stars and the large-scale
structure of the universe, fitting their results into the tapestry of our understanding.
1.8
The Universe of the Very Small
The foregoing discussion has likely impressed on you that the universe is extraordinarily large and
extraordinarily empty. On average, it is 10,000 times more empty than our Galaxy. Yet, as we have seen, even
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
the Galaxy is mostly empty space. The air we breathe has about 1019 atoms in each cubic centimeter—and we
usually think of air as empty space. In the interstellar gas of the Galaxy, there is about one atom in every cubic
centimeter. Intergalactic space is filled so sparsely that to find one atom, on average, we must search through
a cubic meter of space. Most of the universe is fantastically empty; places that are dense, such as the human
body, are tremendously rare.
Even our most familiar solids are mostly space. If we could take apart such a solid, piece by piece, we would
eventually reach the tiny molecules from which it is formed. Molecules are the smallest particles into which
any matter can be divided while still retaining its chemical properties. A molecule of water (H2O), for example,
consists of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom bonded together.
Molecules, in turn, are built of atoms, which are the smallest particles of an element that can still be identified
as that element. For example, an atom of gold is the smallest possible piece of gold. Nearly 100 different kinds
of atoms (elements) exist in nature. Most of them are rare, and only a handful account for more than 99% of
everything with which we come in contact. The most abundant elements in the cosmos today are listed in
Table 1.1; think of this table as the “greatest hits” of the universe when it comes to elements. Note that the list
includes the four elements most common in life on Earth—hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen.
The Cosmically Abundant Elements
Element1
Symbol
Number of Atoms per
Million Hydrogen Atoms
Hydrogen
H
1,000,000
Helium
He
80,000
Carbon
C
Nitrogen
N
Oxygen
O
Neon
Ne
Magnesium
Mg
Silicon
Si
Sulfur
S
Iron
Fe
Table 1.1
All atoms consist of a central, positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively charged electrons. The bulk
of the matter in each atom is found in the nucleus, which consists of positive protons and electrically neutral
neutrons all bound tightly together in a very small space. Each element is defined by the number of protons in
its atoms. Thus, any atom with 6 protons in its nucleus is called carbon, any with 50 protons is called tin, and
This list of elements is arranged in order of the atomic number, which is the number of protons in each nucleus.
1.8 • The Universe of the Very Small
any with 70 protons is called ytterbium. (For a list of the elements, see Appendix K.)
The distance from an atomic nucleus to its electrons is typically 100,000 times the size of the nucleus itself. This
is why we say that even solid matter is mostly space. The typical atom is far emptier than the solar system out
to Neptune. (The distance from Earth to the Sun, for example, is only 100 times the size of the Sun.) This is one
reason atoms are not like miniature solar systems.
Remarkably, physicists have discovered that everything that happens in the universe, from the smallest atomic
nucleus to the largest superclusters of galaxies, can be explained through the action of only four forces:
gravity, electromagnetism (which combines the actions of electricity and magnetism), and two forces that act
at the nuclear level. The fact that there are four forces (and not a million, or just one) has puzzled physicists
and astronomers for many years and has led to a quest for a unified picture of nature.
To construct an atom, particle by particle, check out this guided animation (https://openstax.org/l/
30buildanatom) for building an atom.
1.9
A Conclusion and a Beginning
If you are new to astronomy, you have probably reached the end of our brief tour in this chapter with mixed
emotions. On the one hand, you may be fascinated by some of the new ideas you’ve read about and you may
be eager to learn more. On the other hand, you may be feeling a bit overwhelmed by the number of topics we
have covered, and the number of new words and ideas we have introduced. Learning astronomy is a little like
learning a new language: at first it seems there are so many new expressions that you’ll never master them
all, but with practice, you soon develop facility with them.
At this point you may also feel a bit small and insignificant, dwarfed by the cosmic scales of distance and time.
But, there is another way to look at what you have learned from our first glimpses of the cosmos. Let us
consider the history of the universe from the Big Bang to today and compress it, for easy reference, into a
single year. (We have borrowed this idea from Carl Sagan’s 1977 Pulitzer Prize-winning book, The Dragons of
Eden.)
On this scale, the Big Bang happened at the first moment of January 1, and this moment, when you are
reading this chapter would be the end of the very last second of December 31. When did other events in the
development of the universe happen in this “cosmic year?” Our solar system formed around September 10,
and the oldest rocks we can date on Earth go back to the third week in September (Figure 1.15).
LINK TO LEARNING
1 • Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour
Figure 1.15 Charting Cosmic Time. On a cosmic calendar, where the time since the Big Bang is compressed into 1 year, creatures
we would call human do not emerge on the scene until the evening of December 31. (credit: February: modification of work by NASA,
JPL-Caltech, W. Reach (SSC/Caltech); March: modification of work by ESA, Hubble and NASA, Acknowledgement: Giles Chapdelaine;
April: modification of work by NASA, ESA, CFHT, CXO, M.J. Jee (University of California, Davis), A. Mahdavi (San Francisco State
University); May: modification of work by NASA, JPL-Caltech; June: modification of work by NASA/ESA; July: modification of work by
NASA, JPL-Caltech, Harvard-Smithsonian; August: modification of work by NASA, JPL-Caltech, R. Hurt (SSC-Caltech); September:
modification of work by NASA; October: modification of work by NASA; November: modification of work by Dénes Emőke)
Where does the origin of human beings fall during the course of this cosmic year? The answer turns out to be
the evening of December 31. The invention of the alphabet doesn’t occur until the fiftieth second of 11:59 p.m.
on December 31. And the beginnings of modern astronomy are a mere fraction of a second before the New
Year. Seen in a cosmic context, the amount of time we have had to study the stars is minute, and our success
in piecing together as much of the story as we have is remarkable.
Certainly our attempts to understand the universe are not complete. As new technologies and new ideas allow
us to gather more and better data about the cosmos, our present picture of astronomy will very likely undergo
many changes. Still, as you read our current progress report on the exploration of the universe, take a few
minutes every once in a while just to savor how much you have already learned.
1.9 • A Conclusion and a Beginning
For Further Exploration
Books
Miller, Ron, and William Hartmann. The Grand Tour: A Traveler’s Guide to the Solar System. 3rd ed. Workman,
2005. This volume for beginners is a colorfully illustrated voyage among the planets.
Sagan, Carl. Cosmos. Ballantine, 2013 [1980]. This tome presents a classic overview of astronomy by an
astronomer who had a true gift for explaining things clearly. (You can also check out Sagan’s television series
Cosmos: A Personal Voyage and Neil DeGrasse Tyson’s current series Cosmos: A Spacetime Odyssey.)
Tyson, Neil DeGrasse, and Don Goldsmith. Origins: Fourteen Billion Years of Cosmic Evolution. Norton, 2004.
This book provides a guided tour through the beginnings of the universe, galaxies, stars, planets, and life.
Websites
If you enjoyed the beautiful images in this chapter (and there are many more fabulous photos to come in
other chapters), you may want to know where you can obtain and download such pictures for your own
enjoyment. (Many astronomy images are from government-supported instruments or projects, paid for by tax
dollars, and therefore are free of copyright laws.) Here are three resources we especially like:
•
Astronomy Picture of the Day: apod.nasa.gov/apod/astropix.html (https://apod.nasa.gov/apod/astropix.html).
Two space scientists scour the Internet and select one beautiful astronomy image to feature each day. Their
archives range widely, from images of planets and nebulae to rockets and space instruments; they also have
many photos of the night sky. The search function (see the menu on the bottom of the page) works quite well
for finding something specific among the many years’ worth of daily images.
•
Hubble Space Telescope Images: https://www.spacetelescope.org/images/ (https://www.spacetelescope.org/
images/). Here you can browse some of the remarkable images, select a particular subject in the menu boxes,
or search for the name of an object that intrigues you in this book.
•
National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s (NASA’s) Planetary Photojournal: photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov
(https://photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov). This site features thousands of images from planetary exploration, with
captions of varied length. You can select images by world, feature name, date, or catalog number, and
download images in a number of popular formats. However, only NASA mission images are included. Note the
Photojournal Search option on the menu at the top of the homepage to access ways to search their archives.
Videos
Powers of Ten: www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fKBhvDjuy0 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fKBhvDjuy0).
This classic short video is a much earlier version of Powers of Ten, narrated by Philip Morrison (9:00).
The Known Universe: www.youtube.com/watch?v=17jymDn0W6U (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=17jymDn0W6U). This video tour from the American Museum of Natural History has realistic
animation, music, and captions (6:30).
Wanderers: apod.nasa.gov/apod/ap141208.html (https://apod.nasa.gov/apod/ap141208.html). This video
provides a tour of the solar system, with narrative by Carl Sagan, imagining other worlds with dramatically
realistic paintings (3:50).
1 • For Further Exploration
