Figure 6.1 Hubble Space Telescope (HST). This artist’s impression shows the Hubble above Earth, with the rectangular solar
panels that provide it with power seen to the left and right.
Chapter Outline
6.1 Telescopes
6.2 Telescopes Today
6.3 Visible-Light Detectors and Instruments
6.4 Radio Telescopes
6.5 Observations outside Earth’s Atmosphere
6.6 The Future of Large Telescopes
Thinking Ahead
If you look at the sky when you are far away from city lights, there seem to be an overwhelming number of
stars up there. In reality, only about 9000 stars are visible to the unaided eye (from both hemispheres of our
planet). The light from most stars is so weak that by the time it reaches Earth, it cannot be detected by the
human eye. How can we learn about the vast majority of objects in the universe that our unaided eyes simply
cannot see?
In this chapter, we describe the tools astronomers use to extend their vision into space. We have learned
almost everything we know about the universe from studying electromagnetic radiation, as discussed in the
chapter on Radiation and Spectra. In the twentieth century, our exploration of space made it possible to detect
electromagnetic radiation at all wavelengths, from gamma rays to radio waves. The different wavelengths
carry different kinds of information, and the appearance of any given object often depends on the wavelength
at which the observations are made.
Astronomical Instruments
6 • Thinking Ahead
6.1
Telescopes
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the three basic components of a modern system for measuring astronomical sources
Describe the main functions of a telescope
Describe the two basic types of visible-light telescopes and how they form images
Systems for Measuring Radiation
There are three basic components of a modern system for measuring radiation from astronomical sources.
First, there is a telescope, which serves as a “bucket” for collecting visible light (or radiation at other
wavelengths, as shown in (Figure 6.2). Just as you can catch more rain with a garbage can than with a coffee
cup, large telescopes gather much more light than your eye can. Second, there is an instrument attached to
the telescope that sorts the incoming radiation by wavelength. Sometimes the sorting is fairly crude. For
example, we might simply want to separate blue light from red light so that we can determine the
temperature of a star. But at other times, we want to see individual spectral lines to determine what an object
is made of, or to measure its speed (as explained in the Radiation and Spectra chapter). Third, we need some
type of detector, a device that senses the radiation in the wavelength regions we have chosen and
permanently records the observations.
Figure 6.2 Orion Region at Different Wavelengths. The same part of the sky looks different when observed with instruments that
are sensitive to different bands of the spectrum. (a) Visible light: this shows part of the Orion region as the human eye sees it, with
dotted lines added to show the figure of the mythical hunter, Orion. (b) X-rays: here, the view emphasizes the point-like X-ray
sources nearby. The colors are artificial, changing from yellow to white to blue with increasing energy of the X-rays. The bright, hot
stars in Orion are still seen in this image, but so are many other objects located at very different distances, including other stars, star
corpses, and galaxies at the edge of the observable universe. (c) Infrared radiation: here, we mainly see the glowing dust in this
region. (credit a: modification of work by Howard McCallon/NASA/IRAS; credit b: modification of work by Howard McCallon/NASA/
IRAS; credit c: modification of work by Michael F. Corcoran)
The history of the development of astronomical telescopes is about how new technologies have been applied
to improve the efficiency of these three basic components: the telescopes, the wavelength-sorting device, and
the detectors. Let’s first look at the development of the telescope.
Many ancient cultures built special sites for observing the sky (Figure 6.3). At these ancient observatories, they
could measure the positions of celestial objects, mostly to keep track of time and date. Many of these ancient
observatories had religious and ritual functions as well. The eye was the only device available to gather light,
all of the colors in the light were observed at once, and the only permanent record of the observations was
made by human beings writing down or sketching what they saw.
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Figure 6.3 Two Pre-Telescopic Observatories. (a) Machu Picchu is a fifteenth century Incan site located in Peru. (b) Stonehenge, a
prehistoric site (3000–2000 BCE), is located in England. (credit a: modification of work by Allard Schmidt)
While Hans Lippershey, Zaccharias Janssen, and Jacob Metius are all credited with the invention of the
telescope around 1608—applying for patents within weeks of each other—it was Galileo who, in 1610, used
this simple tube with lenses (which he called a spyglass) to observe the sky and gather more light than his
eyes alone could. Even his small telescope—used over many nights—revolutionized ideas about the nature of
the planets and the position of Earth.
How Telescopes Work
Telescopes have come a long way since Galileo’s time. Now they tend to be huge devices; the most expensive
cost hundreds of millions to billions of dollars. (To provide some reference point, however, keep in mind that
just renovating college football stadiums typically costs hundreds of millions of dollars—with the most
expensive recent renovation, at Texas A&M University’s Kyle Field, costing $450 million.) The reason
astronomers keep building bigger and bigger telescopes is that celestial objects—such as planets, stars, and
galaxies—send much more light to Earth than any human eye (with its tiny opening) can catch, and bigger
telescopes can detect fainter objects. If you have ever watched the stars with a group of friends, you know that
there’s plenty of starlight to go around; each of you can see each of the stars. If a thousand more people were
watching, each of them would also catch a bit of each star’s light. Yet, as far as you are concerned, the light not
shining into your eye is wasted. It would be great if some of this “wasted” light could also be captured and
brought to your eye. This is precisely what a telescope does.
The most important functions of a telescope are (1) to collect the faint light from an astronomical source and
(2) to focus all the light into a point or an image. Most objects of interest to astronomers are extremely faint:
the more light we can collect, the better we can study such objects. (And remember, even though we are
focusing on visible light first, there are many telescopes that collect other kinds of electromagnetic radiation.)
Telescopes that collect visible radiation use a lens or mirror to gather the light. Other types of telescopes may
use collecting devices that look very different from the lenses and mirrors with which we are familiar, but they
serve the same function. In all types of telescopes, the light-gathering ability is determined by the area of the
device acting as the light-gathering “bucket.” Since most telescopes have mirrors or lenses, we can compare
their light-gathering power by comparing the apertures, or diameters, of the opening through which light
travels or reflects.
The amount of light a telescope can collect increases with the size of the aperture. A telescope with a mirror
that is 4 meters in diameter can collect 16 times as much light as a telescope that is 1 meter in diameter. (The
diameter is squared because the area of a circle equals πd2/4, where d is the diameter of the circle.)
6.1 • Telescopes
E X A M P L E 6 . 1
Calculating the Light-Collecting Area
What is the area of a 1-m diameter telescope? A 4-m diameter one?
Solution
Using the equation for the area of a circle,
the area of a 1-m telescope is
and the area of a 4-m telescope is
Check Your Learning
Show that the ratio of the two areas is 16:1.
Answer:
Therefore, with 16 times the area, a 4-m telescope collects 16 times the light of a 1-m
telescope.
After the telescope forms an image, we need some way to detect and record it so that we can measure,
reproduce, and analyze the image in various ways. Before the nineteenth century, astronomers simply viewed
images with their eyes and wrote descriptions of what they saw. This was very inefficient and did not lead to a
very reliable long-term record; you know from crime shows on television that eyewitness accounts are often
inaccurate.
In the nineteenth century, the use of photography became widespread. In those days, photographs were a
chemical record of an image on a specially treated glass plate. Today, the image is generally detected with
sensors similar to those in digital cameras, recorded electronically, and stored in computers. This permanent
record can then be used for detailed and quantitative studies. Professional astronomers rarely look through
the large telescopes that they use for their research.
Formation of an Image by a Lens or a Mirror
Whether or not you wear glasses, you see the world through lenses; they are key elements of your eyes. A lens
is a transparent piece of material that bends the rays of light passing through it. If the light rays are parallel as
they enter, the lens brings them together in one place to form an image (Figure 6.4). If the curvatures of the
lens surfaces are just right, all parallel rays of light (say, from a star) are bent, or refracted, in such a way that
they converge toward a point, called the focus of the lens. At the focus, an image of the light source appears.
In the case of parallel light rays, the distance from the lens to the location where the light rays focus, or image,
behind the lens is called the focal length of the lens.
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Figure 6.4 Formation of an Image by a Simple Lens. Parallel rays from a distant source are bent by the convex lens so that they all
come together in a single place (the focus) to form an image.
As you look at Figure 6.4, you may ask why two rays of light from the same star would be parallel to each
other. After all, if you draw a picture of star shining in all directions, the rays of light coming from the star
don’t look parallel at all. But remember that the stars (and other astronomical objects) are all extremely far
away. By the time the few rays of light pointed toward us actually arrive at Earth, they are, for all practical
purposes, parallel to each other. Put another way, any rays that were not parallel to the ones pointed at Earth
are now heading in some very different direction in the universe.
To view the image formed by the lens in a telescope, we use an additional lens called an eyepiece. The
eyepiece focuses the image at a distance that is either directly viewable by a human or at a convenient place
for a detector. Using different eyepieces, we can change the magnification (or size) of the image and also
redirect the light to a more accessible location. Stars look like points of light, and magnifying them makes little
difference, but the image of a planet or a galaxy, which has structure, can often benefit from being magnified.
Many people, when thinking of a telescope, picture a long tube with a large glass lens at one end. This design,
which uses a lens as its main optical element to form an image, as we have been discussing, is known as a
refractor (Figure 6.5), and a telescope based on this design is called a refracting telescope. Galileo’s
telescopes were refractors, as are today’s binoculars and field glasses. However, there is a limit to the size of a
refracting telescope. The largest one ever built was a 49-inch refractor built for the Paris 1900 Exposition, and it
was dismantled after the Exposition. Currently, the largest refracting telescope is the 40-inch refractor at
Yerkes Observatory in Wisconsin.
6.1 • Telescopes
Figure 6.5 Refracting and Reflecting Telescopes. Light enters a refracting telescope through a lens at the upper end, which
focuses the light near the bottom of the telescope. An eyepiece then magnifies the image so that it can be viewed by the eye, or a
detector like a photographic plate can be placed at the focus. The upper end of a reflecting telescope is open, and the light passes
through to the mirror located at the bottom of the telescope. The mirror then focuses the light at the top end, where it can be
detected. Alternatively, as in this sketch, a second mirror may reflect the light to a position outside the telescope structure, where an
observer can have easier access to it. Professional astronomers’ telescopes are more complicated than this, but they follow the same
principles of reflection and refraction.
One problem with a refracting telescope is that the light must pass through the lens of a refractor. That means
the glass must be perfect all the way through, and it has proven very difficult to make large pieces of glass
without flaws and bubbles in them. Also, optical properties of transparent materials change a little bit with the
wavelengths (or colors) of light, so there is some additional distortion, known as chromatic aberration. Each
wavelength focuses at a slightly different spot, causing the image to appear blurry.
In addition, since the light must pass through the lens, the lens can only be supported around its edges (just
like the frames of our eyeglasses). The force of gravity will cause a large lens to sag and distort the path of the
light rays as they pass through it. Finally, because the light passes through it, both sides of the lens must be
manufactured to precisely the right shape in order to produce a sharp image.
A different type of telescope uses a concave primary mirror as its main optical element. The mirror is curved
like the inner surface of a sphere, and it reflects light in order to form an image (Figure 6.5). Telescope mirrors
are coated with a shiny metal, usually silver, aluminum, or, occasionally, gold, to make them highly reflective. If
the mirror has the correct shape, all parallel rays are reflected back to the same point, the focus of the mirror.
Thus, images are produced by a mirror exactly as they are by a lens.
Telescopes designed with mirrors avoid the problems of refracting telescopes. Because the light is reflected
from the front surface only, flaws and bubbles within the glass do not affect the path of the light. In a
telescope designed with mirrors, only the front surface has to be manufactured to a precise shape, and the
mirror can be supported from the back. For these reasons, most astronomical telescopes today (both amateur
and professional) use a mirror rather than a lens to form an image; this type of telescope is called a reflecting
telescope. The first successful reflecting telescope was built by Isaac Newton in 1668.
In a reflecting telescope, the concave mirror is placed at the bottom of a tube or open framework. The mirror
reflects the light back up the tube to form an image near the front end at a location called the prime focus.
The image can be observed at the prime focus, or additional mirrors can intercept the light and redirect it to a
6 • Astronomical Instruments
position where the observer can view it more easily (Figure 6.6). Since an astronomer at the prime focus can
block much of the light coming to the main mirror, the use of a small secondary mirror allows more light to
get through the system.
Figure 6.6 Focus Arrangements for Reflecting Telescopes. Reflecting telescopes have different options for where the light is
brought to a focus. With prime focus, light is detected where it comes to a focus after reflecting from the primary mirror. With
Newtonian focus, light is reflected by a small secondary mirror off to one side, where it can be detected (see also Figure 6.5). Most
large professional telescopes have a Cassegrain focus in which light is reflected by the secondary mirror down through a hole in the
primary mirror to an observing station below the telescope.
Choosing Your Own Telescope
If the astronomy course you are taking whets your appetite for exploring the sky further, you may be
thinking about buying your own telescope. Many excellent amateur telescopes are available, and some
research is required to find the best model for your needs. Some good sources of information about
personal telescopes are the two popular US magazines aimed at amateur astronomers: Sky & Telescope
and Astronomy. Both carry regular articles with advice, reviews, and advertisements from reputable
telescope dealers.
Some of the factors that determine which telescope is right for you depend upon your preferences:
•
Will you be setting up the telescope in one place and leaving it there, or do you want an instrument
that is portable and can come with you on outdoor excursions? How portable should it be, in terms of
size and weight?
•
Do you want to observe the sky with your eyes only, or do you want to take photographs? (Longexposure photography, for example, requires a good clock drive to turn your telescope to compensate
for Earth’s rotation.)
•
What types of objects will you be observing? Are you interested primarily in comets, planets, star
clusters, or galaxies, or do you want to observe all kinds of celestial sights?
You may not know the answers to some of these questions yet. For this reason, you may want to “test-
MAKING CONNECTIONS
6.1 • Telescopes
drive” some telescopes first. Most communities have amateur astronomy clubs that sponsor star parties
open to the public. The members of those clubs often know a lot about telescopes and can share their ideas
with you. Your instructor may know where the nearest amateur astronomy club meets; or, to find a club
near you, use the websites suggested in Appendix B.
Furthermore, you may already have an instrument like a telescope at home (or have access to one through
a relative or friend). Many amateur astronomers recommend starting your survey of the sky with a good
pair of binoculars. These are easily carried around and can show you many objects not visible (or clear) to
the unaided eye.
When you are ready to purchase a telescope, you might find the following ideas useful:
•
The key characteristic of a telescope is the aperture of the main mirror or lens; when someone says
they have a 6-inch or 8-inch telescope, they mean the diameter of the collecting surface. The larger the
aperture, the more light you can gather, and the fainter the objects you can see or photograph.
•
Telescopes of a given aperture that use lenses (refractors) are typically more expensive than those
using mirrors (reflectors) because both sides of a lens must be polished to great accuracy. And,
because the light passes through it, the lens must be made of high-quality glass throughout. In
contrast, only the front surface of a mirror must be accurately polished.
•
Magnification is not one of the criteria on which to base your choice of a telescope. As we discussed,
the magnification of the image is done by a smaller eyepiece, so the magnification can be adjusted by
changing eyepieces. However, a telescope will magnify not only the astronomical object you are
viewing but also the turbulence of Earth’s atmosphere. If the magnification is too high, your image will
shimmer and shake and be difficult to view. A good telescope will come with a variety of eyepieces that
stay within the range of useful magnification.
•
The mount of a telescope (the structure on which it rests) is one of its most critical elements. Because a
telescope shows a tiny field of view, which is magnified significantly, even the smallest vibration or
jarring of the telescope can move the object you are viewing around or out of your field of view. A
sturdy and stable mount is essential for serious viewing or photography (although it clearly affects how
portable your telescope can be).
•
A telescope requires some practice to set up and use effectively. Don’t expect everything to go
perfectly on your first try. Take some time to read the instructions. If a local amateur astronomy club is
nearby, use it as a resource.
6.2
Telescopes Today
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Recognize the largest visible-light and infrared telescopes in operation today
Discuss the factors relevant to choosing an appropriate telescope site
Define the technique of adaptive optics and describe the effects of the atmosphere on astronomical
observations
Since Newton’s time, when the sizes of the mirrors in telescopes were measured in inches, reflecting
telescopes have grown ever larger. In 1948, US astronomers built a telescope with a 5-meter (200-inch)
diameter mirror on Palomar Mountain in Southern California. It remained the largest visible-light telescope in
the world for several decades. The giants of today, however, have primary mirrors (the largest mirrors in the
telescope) that are 8- to 10-meters in diameter, and larger ones are being built (Figure 6.7).
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Figure 6.7 Large Telescope Mirror. This image shows one of the primary mirrors of the European Southern Observatory’s Very
Large Telescope, named Yepun, just after it was recoated with aluminum. The mirror is a little over 8 meters in diameter. (credit:
ESO/G. Huedepohl)
Modern Visible-Light and Infrared Telescopes
The decades starting in 1990 saw telescope building around the globe grow at an unprecedented rate. (See
Table 6.1, which also includes websites for each telescope in case you want to visit or learn more about them.)
Technological advancements had finally made it possible to build telescopes significantly larger than the
5-meter telescope at Palomar at a reasonable cost. New technologies have also been designed to work well in
the infrared, and not just visible, wavelengths.
Large Single-Dish Visible-Light and Infrared Telescopes
Aperture
(m)
Telescope Name
Location
Status
Website
European Extremely
Large Telescope (E-
ELT)
Cerro Armazonas,
Chile
First light 2025
(estimated)
www.eso.org/sci/
facilities/eelt
Thirty-Meter Telescope
(TMT)
Maunakea, HI
First light 2025
(estimated)
www.tmt.org
24.5
Giant Magellan
Telescope (GMT)
Las Campanas
Observatory, Chile
First light 2025
(estimated)
www.gmto.org
11.1 × 9.9
Southern African
Large Telescope (SALT)
Sutherland, South
Africa
www.salt.ac.za
10.4
Gran Telescopio
Canarias (GTC)
La Palma, Canary
Islands
First light 2007
http://www.gtc.iac.es
10.0
Keck I and II (two
telescopes)
Maunakea, HI
Completed
1993–96
www.keckobservatory.org
9.1
Hobby–Eberly
Telescope (HET)
Mount Locke, TX
Completed 1997
www.as.utexas.edu/
mcdonald/het
Table 6.1
6.2 • Telescopes Today
Aperture
(m)
Telescope Name
Location
Status
Website
8.4
Large Binocular
Telescope (LBT) (two
telescopes)
Mount Graham, AZ
First light 2004
www.lbto.org
8.4
Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope (Rubin Obs.)
The Cerro Pachón,
Chile
First light 2021
www.lsst.org
8.3
Subaru Telescope
Maunakea, HI
First light 1998
www.naoj.org
8.2
Very Large Telescope
(VLT)
Cerro Paranal, Chile
All four
telescopes
completed 2000
www.eso.org/public/
teles-instr/paranal
8.1
Gemini North and
Gemini South
Maunakea, HI
(North) and Cerro
Pachón, Chile
(South)
First light 1999
(North), First
light 2000
(South)
www.gemini.edu
6.5
Magellan Telescopes
(two telescopes:
Baade and Landon
Clay)
Las Campanas,
Chile
First light 2000
and 2002
obs.carnegiescience.edu/
Magellan
6.5
Multi-Mirror Telescope
(MMT)
Mount Hopkins, AZ
Completed 1979
www.mmto.org
6.0
Big Telescope
Altazimuth (BTA-6)
Mount Pastukhov,
Russia
Completed 1976
w0.sao.ru/Doc-en/
Telescopes/bta/
descrip.html
5.1
Hale Telescope
Mount Palomar, CA
Completed 1948
www.astro.caltech.edu/
palomar/about/
telescopes/hale.html
Table 6.1
The differences between the Palomar telescope and the modern Gemini North telescope (to take an example)
are easily seen in Figure 6.8. The Palomar telescope is a massive steel structure designed to hold the 14.5-ton
primary mirror with a 5-meter diameter. Glass tends to sag under its own weight; hence, a huge steel
structure is needed to hold the mirror. A mirror 8 meters in diameter, the size of the Gemini North telescope, if
it were built using the same technology as the Palomar telescope, would have to weigh at least eight times as
much and would require an enormous steel structure to support it.
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Figure 6.8 Modern Reflecting Telescopes. (a) The Palomar 5-meter reflector: The Hale telescope on Palomar Mountain has a
complex mounting structure that enables the telescope (in the open “tube” pointing upward in this photo) to swing easily into any
position. (b) The Gemini North 8-meter telescope: The Gemini North mirror has a larger area than the Palomar mirror, but note how
much less massive the whole instrument seems. (credit a: modification of work by Caltech/Palomar Observatory; credit b:
modification of work by Gemini Observatory/AURA)
The 8-meter Gemini North telescope looks like a featherweight by contrast, and indeed it is. The mirror is only
about 8 inches thick and weighs 24.5 tons, less than twice as much as the Palomar mirror. The Gemini North
telescope was completed about 50 years after the Palomar telescope. Engineers took advantage of new
technologies to build a telescope that is much lighter in weight relative to the size of the primary mirror. The
Gemini mirror does sag, but with modern computers, it is possible to measure that sag many times each
second and apply forces at 120 different locations to the back of the mirror to correct the sag, a process called
active control. Seventeen telescopes with mirrors 6.5 meters in diameter and larger have been constructed
since 1990.
The twin 10-meter Keck telescopes on Maunakea, which were the first of these new-technology instruments,
use precision control in an entirely novel way. Instead of a single primary mirror 10 meters in diameter, each
Keck telescope achieves its larger aperture by combining the light from 36 separate hexagonal mirrors, each
1.8 meters wide (Figure 6.9). Computer-controlled actuators (motors) constantly adjust these 36 mirrors so
that the overall reflecting surface acts like a single mirror with just the right shape to collect and focus the light
into a sharp image.
6.2 • Telescopes Today
Figure 6.9 Thirty-Six Eyes Are Better Than One. The mirror of the 10-meter Keck telescope is composed of 36 hexagonal sections.
(credit: NASA)
Learn more about the Keck Observatory on Maunakea (https://openstax.org/l/30KeckObserv) through this
History Channel clip on the telescopes and the work that they do.
In addition to holding the mirror, the steel structure of a telescope is designed so that the entire telescope can
be pointed quickly toward any object in the sky. Since Earth is rotating, the telescope must have a motorized
drive system that moves it very smoothly from east to west at exactly the same rate that Earth is rotating from
west to east, so it can continue to point at the object being observed. All this machinery must be housed in a
dome to protect the telescope from the elements. The dome has an opening in it that can be positioned in
front of the telescope and moved along with it, so that the light from the objects being observed is not
blocked.
George Ellery Hale: Master Telescope Builder
George Ellery Hale (Figure 6.10) was a giant among early telescope builders. Not once, but four times, he
initiated projects that led to the construction of what was the world’s largest telescope at the time. And he
was a master at winning over wealthy benefactors to underwrite the construction of these new
instruments.
LINK TO LEARNING
VOYAGERS IN ASTRONOMY
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Figure 6.10 George Ellery Hale (1868–1938). Hale’s work led to the construction of several major telescopes, including the
40-inch refracting telescope at Yerkes Observatory, and three reflecting telescopes: the 60-inch Hale and 100-inch Hooker
telescopes at Mount Wilson Observatory, and the 200-inch Hale Telescope at Palomar Observatory.
Hale’s training and early research were in solar physics. In 1892, at age 24, he was named associate
professor of astral physics and director of the astronomical observatory at the University of Chicago. At the
time, the largest telescope in the world was the 36-inch refractor at the Lick Observatory near San Jose,
California. Taking advantage of an existing glass blank for a 40-inch telescope, Hale set out to raise money
for a larger telescope than the one at Lick. One prospective donor was Charles T. Yerkes, who, among other
things, ran the trolley system in Chicago.
Hale wrote to Yerkes, encouraging him to support the construction of the giant telescope by saying that
“the donor could have no more enduring monument. It is certain that Mr. Lick’s name would not have been
nearly so widely known today were it not for the famous observatory established as a result of his
munificence.” Yerkes agreed, and the new telescope was completed in May 1897; it remains the largest
refractor in the world (Figure 6.11).
6.2 • Telescopes Today
Figure 6.11 World’s Largest Refractor. The Yerkes 40-inch (1-meter) telescope.
Even before the completion of the Yerkes refractor, Hale was not only dreaming of building a still larger
telescope but was also taking concrete steps to achieve that goal. In the 1890s, there was a major
controversy about the relative quality of refracting and reflecting telescopes. Hale realized that 40 inches
was close to the maximum feasible aperture for refracting telescopes. If telescopes with significantly larger
apertures were to be built, they would have to be reflecting telescopes.
Using funds borrowed from his own family, Hale set out to construct a 60-inch reflector. For a site, he left
the Midwest for the much better conditions on Mount Wilson—at the time, a wilderness peak above the
small city of Los Angeles. In 1904, at the age of 36, Hale received funds from the Carnegie Foundation to
establish the Mount Wilson Observatory. The 60-inch mirror was placed in its mount in December 1908.
Two years earlier, in 1906, Hale had already approached John D. Hooker, who had made his fortune in
hardware and steel pipe, with a proposal to build a 100-inch telescope. The technological risks were
substantial. The 60-inch telescope was not yet complete, and the usefulness of large reflectors for
astronomy had yet to be demonstrated. George Ellery Hale’s brother called him “the greatest gambler in
the world.” Once again, Hale successfully obtained funds, and the 100-inch telescope was completed in
November 1917. (It was with this telescope that Edwin Hubble was able to establish that the spiral nebulae
were separate islands of stars—or galaxies—quite removed from our own Milky Way.)
Hale was not through dreaming. In 1926, he wrote an article in Harper’s Magazine about the scientific value
of a still larger telescope. This article came to the attention of the Rockefeller Foundation, which granted $6
million for the construction of a 200-inch telescope. Hale died in 1938, but the 200-inch (5-meter) telescope
on Palomar Mountain was dedicated 10 years later and is now named in Hale’s honor.
Picking the Best Observing Sites
A telescope like the Gemini or Keck telescope costs about $100 million to build. That kind of investment
demands that the telescope be placed in the best possible site. Since the end of the nineteenth century,
astronomers have realized that the best observatory sites are on mountains, far from the lights and pollution
of cities. Although a number of urban observatories remain, especially in the large cities of Europe, they have
become administrative centers or museums. The real action takes place far away, often on desert mountains
or isolated peaks in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, where we find the staff’s living quarters, computers,
electronic and machine shops, and of course the telescopes themselves. A large observatory today requires a
supporting staff of 20 to 100 people in addition to the astronomers.
6 • Astronomical Instruments
The performance of a telescope is determined not only by the size of its mirror but also by its location. Earth’s
atmosphere, so vital to life, presents challenges for the observational astronomer. In at least four ways, our air
imposes limitations on the usefulness of telescopes:
1.
The most obvious limitation is weather conditions such as clouds, wind, and rain. At the best sites, the
weather is clear as much as 75% of the time.
2.
Even on a clear night, the atmosphere filters out a certain amount of starlight, especially in the infrared,
where the absorption is due primarily to water vapor. Astronomers therefore prefer dry sites, generally
found at high altitudes.
3.
The sky above the telescope should be dark. Near cities, the air scatters the glare from lights, producing
an illumination that hides the faintest stars and limits the distances that can be probed by telescopes.
(Astronomers call this effect light pollution.) Observatories are best located at least 100 miles from the
nearest large city.
4.
Finally, the air is often unsteady; light passing through this turbulent air is disturbed, resulting in blurred
star images. Astronomers call these effects “bad seeing.” When seeing is bad, images of celestial objects
are distorted by the constant twisting and bending of light rays by turbulent air.
The best observatory sites are therefore high, dark, and dry. The world’s largest telescopes are found in such
remote mountain locations as the Andes Mountains of Chile (Figure 6.12), the desert peaks of Arizona, the
Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean, and Maunakea in Hawaii, a dormant volcano with an altitude of 13,700
feet (4200 meters).
Light pollution is a problem not just for professional astronomers but for everyone who wants to enjoy the
beauty of the night sky. In addition research is now showing that it can disrupt the life cycle of animals with
whom we share the urban and suburban landscape. And the light wasted shining into the sky leads to
unnecessary municipal expenses and use of fossil fuels. Concerned people have formed an organization,
the International Dark-Sky Association, whose website (https://openstax.org/l/30IntDSA) is full of good
information. A citizen science project called Globe at Night (https://openstax.org/l/30GlbatNght) allows you
to measure the light levels in your community by counting stars and to compare it to others around the
world. Recently, a new threat to dark skies has emerged. A number of commercial companies are planning
and launching large swarms of satellites into low-Earth orbit to provide internet access around the world.
Unfortunately, these satellites reflect sunlight and have already begun to ruin astronomical photographs
the world over. See the Further Exploration section at the end of this chapter for more resources on this
topic. If you get interested in this topic and want to do a paper for your astronomy course or another
course while you are in college, the Dark Night Skies guide (https://openstax.org/l/30DNSGuide) can point
you to a variety of resources on the topic.
LINK TO LEARNING
6.2 • Telescopes Today
Figure 6.12 High and Dry Site. Cerro Paranal, a mountain summit 2.7 kilometers above sea level in Chile’s Atacama Desert, is the
site of the European Southern Observatory’s Very Large Telescope. This photograph shows the four 8-meter telescope buildings on
the site and vividly illustrates that astronomers prefer high, dry sites for their instruments. The 4.1-meter Visible and Infrared Survey
Telescope for Astronomy (VISTA) can be seen in the distance on the next mountain peak. (credit: ESO)
The Resolution of a Telescope
In addition to gathering as much light as they can, astronomers also want to have the sharpest images
possible. Resolution refers to the precision of detail present in an image: that is, the smallest features that can
be distinguished. Astronomers are always eager to make out more detail in the images they study, whether
they are following the weather on Jupiter or trying to peer into the violent heart of a “cannibal galaxy” that
recently ate its neighbor for lunch.
One factor that determines how good the resolution will be is the size of the telescope. Larger apertures
produce sharper images. Until very recently, however, visible-light and infrared telescopes on Earth’s surface
could not produce images as sharp as the theory of light said they should.
The problem—as we saw earlier in this chapter—is our planet’s atmosphere, which is turbulent. It contains
many small-scale blobs or cells of gas that range in size from inches to several feet. Each cell has a slightly
different temperature from its neighbor, and each cell acts like a lens, bending (refracting) the path of the light
by a small amount. This bending slightly changes the position where each light ray finally reaches the detector
in a telescope. The cells of air are in motion, constantly being blown through the light path of the telescope by
winds, often in different directions at different altitudes. As a result, the path followed by the light is constantly
changing.
For an analogy, think about watching a parade from a window high up in a skyscraper. You decide to throw
some confetti down toward the marchers. Even if you drop a handful all at the same time and in the same
direction, air currents will toss the pieces around, and they will reach the ground at different places. As we
described earlier, we can think of the light from the stars as a series of parallel beams, each making its way
through the atmosphere. Each path will be slightly different, and each will reach the detector of the telescope
at a slightly different place. The result is a blurred image, and because the cells are being blown by the wind,
the nature of the blur will change many times each second. You have probably noticed this effect as the
“twinkling” of stars seen from Earth. The light beams are bent enough that part of the time they reach your
eye, and part of the time some of them miss, thereby making the star seem to vary in brightness. In space,
however, the light of the stars is steady.
Astronomers search the world for locations where the amount of atmospheric blurring, or turbulence, is as
small as possible. It turns out that the best sites are in coastal mountain ranges and on isolated volcanic peaks
in the middle of an ocean. Air that has flowed long distances over water before it encounters land is especially
stable.
The resolution of an image is measured in units of angle on the sky, typically in units of arcseconds. One
arcsecond is 1/3600 degree, and there are 360 degrees in a full circle. So we are talking about tiny angles on
6 • Astronomical Instruments
the sky. To give you a sense of just how tiny, we might note that 1 arcsecond is how big a quarter would look
when seen from a distance of 5 kilometers. The best images obtained from the ground with traditional
techniques reveal details as small as several tenths of an arcsecond across. This image size is remarkably
good. One of the main reasons for launching the Hubble Space Telescope was to escape Earth’s atmosphere
and obtain even sharper images.
But since we can’t put every telescope into space, astronomers have devised a technique called adaptive
optics that can beat Earth’s atmosphere at its own game of blurring. This technique (which is most effective in
the infrared region of the spectrum with our current technology) makes use of a small flexible mirror placed in
the beam of a telescope. A sensor measures how much the atmosphere has distorted the image, and as often
as 500 times per second, it sends instructions to the flexible mirror on how to change shape in order to
compensate for distortions produced by the atmosphere. The light is thus brought back to an almost perfectly
sharp focus at the detector. Figure 6.13 shows just how effective this technique is. With adaptive optics,
ground-based telescopes can achieve resolutions of 0.1 arcsecond or a little better in the infrared region of the
spectrum. This impressive figure is the equivalent of the resolution that the Hubble Space Telescope achieves
in the visible-light region of the spectrum.
Figure 6.13 Power of Adaptive Optics. One of the clearest pictures of Jupiter ever taken from the ground, this image was produced
with adaptive optics using an 8-meter-diameter telescope at the Very Large Telescope in Chile. Adaptive optics uses infrared
wavelengths to remove atmospheric blurring, resulting in a much clearer image. (credit: modification of work by ESO, F.Marchis,
M.Wong (UC Berkeley); E.Marchetti, P.Amico, S.Tordo (ESO))
How Astronomers Really Use Telescopes
In the popular view (and some bad movies), an astronomer spends most nights in a cold observatory
peering through a telescope, but this is not very accurate today. Most astronomers do not live at
observatories, but near the universities or laboratories where they work. An astronomer might spend only a
week or so each year observing at the telescope and the rest of the time measuring or analyzing the data
acquired from large project collaborations and dedicated surveys. Many astronomers use radio telescopes
for space experiments, which work just as well during the daylight hours. Still others work at purely
theoretical problems using supercomputers and never observe at a telescope of any kind.
ASTRONOMY BASICS
6.2 • Telescopes Today
Even when astronomers are observing with large telescopes, they seldom peer through them. Electronic
detectors permanently record the data for detailed analysis later. At some observatories, observations may
be made remotely, with the astronomer sitting at a computer thousands of miles away from the telescope.
Time on major telescopes is at a premium, and an observatory director will typically receive many more
requests for telescope time than can be accommodated during the year. Astronomers must therefore write
a convincing proposal explaining how they would like to use the telescope and why their observations will
be important to the progress of astronomy. A committee of astronomers is then asked to judge and rank
the proposals, and time is assigned only to those with the greatest merit. Even if your proposal is among
the high-rated ones, you may have to wait many months for your turn. If the skies are cloudy on the nights
you have been assigned, it may be more than a year before you get another chance.
Some older astronomers still remember long, cold nights spent alone in an observatory dome, with only
music from a tape recorder or an all-night radio station for company. The sight of the stars shining
brilliantly hour after hour through the open slit in the observatory dome was unforgettable. So, too, was
the relief as the first pale light of dawn announced the end of a 12-hour observation session. Astronomy is
much easier today, with teams of observers working together, often at their computers, in a warm room.
Those who are more nostalgic, however, might argue that some of the romance has gone from the field,
too.
6.3
Visible-Light Detectors and Instruments
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the difference between photographic plates and charge-coupled devices
Describe the unique difficulties associated with infrared observations and their solutions
Describe how a spectrometer works
After a telescope collects radiation from an astronomical source, the radiation must be detected and
measured. The first detector used for astronomical observations was the human eye, but it suffers from being
connected to an imperfect recording and retrieving device—the human brain. Photography and modern
electronic detectors have eliminated the quirks of human memory by making a permanent record of the
information from the cosmos.
The eye also suffers from having a very short integration time; it takes only a fraction of a second to add light
energy together before sending the image to the brain. One important advantage of modern detectors is that
the light from astronomical objects can be collected by the detector over longer periods of time; this technique
is called “taking a long exposure.” Exposures of several hours are required to detect very faint objects in the
cosmos.
Before the light reaches the detector, astronomers today normally use some type of instrument to sort the
light according to wavelength. The instrument may be as simple as colored filters, which transmit light within a
specified range of wavelengths. A red transparent plastic is an everyday example of a filter that transmits only
the red light and blocks the other colors. After the light passes through a filter, it forms an image that
astronomers can then use to measure the apparent brightness and color of objects. We will show you many
examples of such images in the later chapters of this book, and we will describe what we can learn from them.
Alternatively, the instrument between telescope and detector may be one of several devices that spread the
light out into its full rainbow of colors so that astronomers can measure individual lines in the spectrum. Such
an instrument (which you learned about in the chapter on Radiation and Spectra) is called a spectrometer
because it allows astronomers to measure (to meter) the spectrum of a source of radiation. Whether a filter or
6 • Astronomical Instruments
a spectrometer, both types of wavelength-sorting instruments still have to use detectors to record and
measure the properties of light.
Photographic and Electronic Detectors
Throughout most of the twentieth century, photographic film or glass plates served as the prime astronomical
detectors, whether for photographing spectra or direct images of celestial objects. In a photographic plate, a
light-sensitive chemical coating is applied to a piece of glass that, when developed, provides a lasting record of
the image. At observatories around the world, vast collections of photographs preserve what the sky has
looked like during the past 100 years. Photography represents a huge improvement over the human eye, but it
still has limitations. Photographic films are inefficient: only about 1% of the light that actually falls on the film
contributes to the chemical change that makes the image; the rest is wasted.
Astronomers today have much more efficient electronic detectors to record astronomical images. Most often,
these are charge-coupled devices (CCDs), which are similar to the detectors used in video camcorders or in
digital cameras (like the one more and more students have on their cell phones) (see Figure 6.14). In a CCD,
photons of radiation hitting any part of the detector generate a stream of charged particles (electrons) that
are stored and counted at the end of the exposure. Each place where the radiation is counted is called a pixel
(picture element), and modern detectors can count the photons in millions of pixels (megapixels, or MPs).
Figure 6.14 Charge-Coupled Devices (CCDs). (a) This CCD is a mere 300-micrometers thick (thinner than a human hair) yet holds
more than 21 million pixels. (b) This matrix of 42 CCDs served the Kepler telescope. (credit a: modification of work by US Department
of Energy; credit b: modification of work by NASA and Ball Aerospace)
Because CCDs typically record as much as 60–70% of all the photons that strike them, and the best silicon and
infrared CCDs exceed 90% sensitivity, we can detect much fainter objects. Among these are many small moons
around the outer planets, icy dwarf planets beyond Pluto, and dwarf galaxies of stars. CCDs also provide more
accurate measurements of the brightness of astronomical objects than photography, and their output is
digital—in the form of numbers that can go directly into a computer for analysis.
Infrared Observations
Observing the universe in the infrared band of the spectrum presents some additional challenges. The
infrared region extends from wavelengths near 1 micrometer (µm), which is about the long wavelength
sensitivity limit of both CCDs and photography, to 100 micrometers or longer. Recall from the discussion on
radiation and spectra that infrared is “heat radiation” (given off at temperatures that we humans are
comfortable with). The main challenge to astronomers using infrared is to distinguish between the tiny
amount of heat radiation that reaches Earth from stars and galaxies, and the much greater heat radiated by
6.3 • Visible-Light Detectors and Instruments
the telescope itself and our planet’s atmosphere.
Typical temperatures on Earth’s surface are near 300 K, and the atmosphere through which observations are
made is only a little cooler. According to Wien’s law (from the chapter on Radiation and Spectra), the
telescope, the observatory, and even the sky are radiating infrared energy with a peak wavelength of about 10
micrometers. To infrared eyes, everything on Earth is brightly aglow—including the telescope and camera
(Figure 6.15). The challenge is to detect faint cosmic sources against this sea of infrared light. Another way to
look at this is that an astronomer using infrared must always contend with the situation that a visible-light
observer would face if working in broad daylight with a telescope and optics lined with bright fluorescent
lights.
Figure 6.15 Infrared Eyes. Infrared waves can penetrate places in the universe from which light is blocked, as shown in this infrared
image where the plastic bag blocks visible light but not infrared. (credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/R. Hurt (SSC))
To solve this problem, astronomers must protect the infrared detector from nearby radiation, just as you
would shield photographic film from bright daylight. Since anything warm radiates infrared energy, the
detector must be isolated in very cold surroundings; often, it is held near absolute zero (1 to 3 K) by immersing
it in liquid helium. The second step is to reduce the radiation emitted by the telescope structure and optics,
and to block this heat from reaching the infrared detector.
Check out The Infrared Zoo (https://openstax.org/l/30IFZoo) to get a sense of what familiar objects look
like with infrared radiation. Slide the slider to change the wavelength of radiation for the picture, and click
the arrow to see other animals.
Spectroscopy
Spectroscopy is one of the astronomer’s most powerful tools, providing information about the composition,
temperature, motion, and other characteristics of celestial objects. More than half of the time spent on most
large telescopes is used for spectroscopy.
The many different wavelengths present in light can be separated by passing them through a spectrometer to
form a spectrum. The design of a simple spectrometer is illustrated in Figure 6.16. Light from the source
(actually, the image of a source produced by the telescope) enters the instrument through a small hole or
LINK TO LEARNING
6 • Astronomical Instruments
narrow slit, and is collimated (made into a beam of parallel rays) by a lens. The light then passes through a
prism, producing a spectrum: different wavelengths leave the prism in different directions because each
wavelength is bent by a different amount when it enters and leaves the prism. A second lens placed behind
the prism focuses the many different images of the slit or entrance hole onto a CCD or other detecting device.
This collection of images (spread out by color) is the spectrum that astronomers can then analyze at a later
point. As spectroscopy spreads the light out into more and more collecting bins, fewer photons go into each
bin, so either a larger telescope is needed or the integration time must be greatly increased—usually both.
Figure 6.16 Prism Spectrometer. The light from the telescope is focused on a slit. A prism (or grating) disperses the light into a
spectrum, which is then photographed or recorded electronically.
In practice, astronomers today are more likely to use a different device, called a grating, to disperse the
spectrum. A grating is a piece of material with thousands of grooves on its surface. While it functions
completely differently, a grating, like a prism, also spreads light out into a spectrum.
6.4
Radio Telescopes
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how radio waves from space are detected
Identify the world’s largest radio telescopes
Define the technique of interferometry and discuss the benefits of interferometers over single-dish
telescopes
In addition to visible and infrared radiation, radio waves from astronomical objects can also be detected from
the surface of Earth. In the early 1930s, Karl G. Jansky, an engineer at Bell Telephone Laboratories, was
experimenting with antennas for long-range radio communication when he encountered some mysterious
static—radio radiation coming from an unknown source (Figure 6.17). He discovered that this radiation came
in strongest about four minutes earlier on each successive day and correctly concluded that since Earth’s
sidereal rotation period (how long it takes us to rotate relative to the stars) is four minutes shorter than a solar
day, the radiation must be originating from some region fixed on the celestial sphere. Subsequent
investigation showed that the source of this radiation was part of the Milky Way Galaxy; Jansky had discovered
the first source of cosmic radio waves.
6.4 • Radio Telescopes
Figure 6.17 First Radio Telescope. This rotating radio antenna was used by Jansky in his serendipitous discovery of radio radiation
from the Milky Way.
In 1936, Grote Reber, who was an amateur astronomer interested in radio communications, used galvanized
iron and wood to build the first antenna specifically designed to receive cosmic radio waves. Over the years,
Reber built several such antennas and used them to carry out pioneering surveys of the sky for celestial radio
sources; he remained active in radio astronomy for more than 30 years. During the first decade, he worked
practically alone because professional astronomers had not yet recognized the vast potential of radio
astronomy.
Detection of Radio Energy from Space
It is important to understand that radio waves cannot be “heard”: they are not the sound waves you hear
coming out of the radio receiver in your home or car. Like light, radio waves are a form of electromagnetic
radiation, but unlike light, we cannot detect them with our senses—we must rely on electronic equipment to
pick them up. In commercial radio broadcasting, we encode sound information (music or a newscaster’s voice)
into radio waves. These must be decoded at the other end and then turned back into sound by speakers or
headphones.
The radio waves we receive from space do not, of course, have music or other program information encoded
in them. If cosmic radio signals were translated into sound, they would sound like the static you hear when
scanning between stations. Nevertheless, there is information in the radio waves we receive—information that
can tell us about the chemistry and physical conditions of the sources of the waves.
Just as vibrating charged particles can produce electromagnetic waves (see the Radiation and Spectra
chapter), electromagnetic waves can make charged particles move back and forth. Radio waves can produce a
current in conductors of electricity such as metals. An antenna is such a conductor: it intercepts radio waves,
which create a feeble current in it. The current is then amplified in a radio receiver until it is strong enough to
measure or record. Like your television or radio, receivers can be tuned to select a single frequency (channel).
In astronomy, however, it is more common to use sophisticated data-processing techniques that allow
thousands of separate frequency bands to be detected simultaneously. Thus, the astronomical radio receiver
operates much like a spectrometer on a visible-light or infrared telescope, providing information about how
much radiation we receive at each wavelength or frequency. After computer processing, the radio signals are
recorded on magnetic disks for further analysis.
Radio waves are reflected by conducting surfaces, just as light is reflected from a shiny metallic surface, and
according to the same laws of optics. A radio-reflecting telescope consists of a concave metal reflector (called a
dish), analogous to a telescope mirror. The radio waves collected by the dish are reflected to a focus, where
they can then be directed to a receiver and analyzed. Because humans are such visual creatures, radio
astronomers often construct a pictorial representation of the radio sources they observe. Figure 6.18 shows
6 • Astronomical Instruments
such a radio image of a distant galaxy, where radio telescopes reveal vast jets and complicated regions of
radio emissions that are completely invisible in photographs taken with light.
Figure 6.18 Radio Image. This image has been constructed of radio observations at the Very Large Array of a galaxy called Cygnus
A. Colors have been added to help the eye sort out regions of different radio intensities. Red regions are the most intense, blue the
least. The visible galaxy would be a small dot in the center of the image. The radio image reveals jets of expelled material (more than
160,000 light-years long) on either side of the galaxy. (credit: NRAO/AUI)
Radio astronomy is a young field compared with visible-light astronomy, but it has experienced tremendous
growth in recent decades. The world’s largest radio reflectors that can be pointed to any direction in the sky
have apertures of 100 meters. One of these has been built at the US National Radio Astronomy Observatory in
West Virginia (Figure 6.19). Table 6.2 lists some of the major radio telescopes of the world.
Figure 6.19 Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope. This fully steerable radio telescope in West Virginia went into operation in
August 2000. Its dish is about 100 meters across. (credit: modification of work by “b3nscott”/Flickr)
Major Radio Observatories of the World
Observatory
Location
Description
Website
Individual Radio Dishes
Five-hundred-meter
Aperture Spherical
radio Telescope (FAST)
Guizhou, China
500-m fixed dish
fast.bao.ac.cn/en/
Table 6.2
6.4 • Radio Telescopes
Observatory
Location
Description
Website
Arecibo Observatory
Arecibo, Puerto
Rico
305-m fixed dish
www.naic.edu
Green Bank Telescope
(GBT)
Green Bank, WV
110 × 100-m steerable
dish
www.science.nrao.edu/facilities/
gbt
Effelsberg 100-m
Telescope
Bonn, Germany
100-m steerable dish
www.mpifr-bonn.mpg.de/en/
effelsberg
Lovell Telescope
Manchester,
England
76-m steerable dish
www.jb.man.ac.uk/aboutus/lovell
Canberra Deep Space
Communication
Complex (CDSCC)
Tidbinbilla,
Australia
70-m steerable dish
www.cdscc.nasa.gov
Goldstone Deep Space
Communications
Complex (GDSCC)
Barstow, CA
70-m steerable dish
www.gdscc.nasa.gov
Parkes Observatory
Parkes,
Australia
64-m steerable dish
www.parkes.atnf.csiro.au
Arrays of Radio Dishes
Square Kilometre Array
(SKA)
South Africa
and Western
Australia
Thousands of dishes,
km2 collecting area,
partial array in 2020
www.skatelescope.org
Atacama Large
Millimeter/
submillimeter Array
(ALMA)
Atacama desert,
Northern Chile
66 7-m and 12-m dishes
www.almaobservatory.org
Jansky Very Large Array
(VLA)
Socorro, New
Mexico
27-element array of
25-m dishes (36-km
baseline)
www.science.nrao.edu/facilities/
vla
Westerbork Synthesis
Radio Telescope (WSRT)
Westerbork, the
Netherlands
12-element array of
25-m dishes (1.6-km
baseline)
www.astron.nl/radioobservatory/public/public-0
Very Long Baseline
Array (VLBA)
Ten US sites, HI
to the Virgin
Islands
10-element array of
25-m dishes (9000 km
baseline)
www.science.nrao.edu/facilities/
vlba
Table 6.2
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Observatory
Location
Description
Website
Australia Telescope
Compact Array (ATCA)
Several sites in
Australia
8-element array (seven
22-m dishes plus
Parkes 64 m)
www.narrabri.atnf.csiro.au
Multi-Element Radio
Linked Interferometer
Network (MERLIN)
Cambridge,
England, and
other British
sites
Network of seven
dishes (the largest is 32
m)
www.e-merlin.ac.uk
Millimeter-wave Telescopes
IRAM
Granada, Spain
30-m steerable mmwave dish
www.iram-institute.org
James Clerk Maxwell
Telescope (JCMT)
Maunakea, HI
15-m steerable mmwave dish
www.eaobservatory.org/jcmt
Nobeyama Radio
Observatory (NRO)
Minamimaki,
Japan
6-element array of
10-m wave dishes
www.nro.nao.ac.jp/en
Hat Creek Radio
Observatory (HCRO)
Cassel, CA
6-element array of 5-m
wave dishes
www.sri.com/researchdevelopment/specializedfacilities/hat-creek-radioobservatory
Table 6.2
Radio Interferometry
As we discussed earlier, a telescope’s ability to show us fine detail (its resolution) depends upon its aperture,
but it also depends upon the wavelength of the radiation that the telescope is gathering. The longer the
waves, the harder it is to resolve fine detail in the images or maps we make. Because radio waves have such
long wavelengths, they present tremendous challenges for astronomers who need good resolution. In fact,
even the largest radio dishes on Earth, operating alone, cannot make out as much detail as the typical small
visible-light telescope used in a college astronomy lab. To overcome this difficulty, radio astronomers have
learned to sharpen their images by linking two or more radio telescopes together electronically. Two or more
telescopes linked together in this way are called an interferometer.
“Interferometer” may seem like a strange term because the telescopes in an interferometer work
cooperatively; they don’t “interfere” with each other. Interference, however, is a technical term for the way
that multiple waves interact with each other when they arrive in our instruments, and this interaction allows us
to coax more detail out of our observations. The resolution of an interferometer depends upon the separation
of the telescopes, not upon their individual apertures. Two telescopes separated by 1 kilometer provide the
same resolution as would a single dish 1 kilometer across (although they are not, of course, able to collect as
much radiation as a radio-wave bucket that is 1 kilometer across).
To get even better resolution, astronomers combine a large number of radio dishes into an interferometer
array. In effect, such an array works like a large number of two-dish interferometers, all observing the same
6.4 • Radio Telescopes
part of the sky together. Computer processing of the results permits the reconstruction of a high-resolution
radio image. The most extensive such instrument in the United States is the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory’s Jansky Very Large Array (VLA) near Socorro, New Mexico. It consists of 27 movable radio
telescopes (on railroad tracks), each having an aperture of 25 meters, spread over a total span of about 36
kilometers. By electronically combining the signals from all of its individual telescopes, this array permits the
radio astronomer to make pictures of the sky at radio wavelengths comparable to those obtained with a
visible-light telescope, with a resolution of about 1 arcsecond.
The Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter array (ALMA) in the Atacama Desert of Northern Chile (Figure
6.20), at an altitude of 16,400 feet, consists of 12 7-meter and 54 12-meter telescopes, and can achieve
baselines up to 16 kilometers. Since it became operational in 2013, it has made observations at resolutions
down to 6 milliarcseconds (0.006 arcseconds), a remarkable achievement for radio astronomy.
Figure 6.20 Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA). Located in the Atacama Desert of Northern Chile, ALMA
currently provides the highest resolution for radio observations. (credit: ESO/S. Guisard)
Watch this documentary (https://openstax.org/l/30ALMAdoc) that explains the work that went into
designing and building ALMA, discusses some of its first images, and explores its future.
Initially, the size of interferometer arrays was limited by the requirement that all of the dishes be physically
wired together. The maximum dimensions of the array were thus only a few tens of kilometers. However,
larger interferometer separations can be achieved if the telescopes do not require a physical connection.
Astronomers, with the use of current technology and computing power, have learned to time the arrival of
electromagnetic waves coming from space very precisely at each telescope and combine the data later. If the
telescopes are as far apart as California and Australia, or as West Virginia and Crimea in Ukraine, the resulting
resolution far surpasses that of visible-light telescopes.
The United States operates the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA), made up of 10 individual telescopes
stretching from the Virgin Islands to Hawaii (Figure 6.21). The VLBA, completed in 1993, can form astronomical
images with a resolution of 0.0001 arcseconds, permitting features as small as 10 astronomical units (AU) to be
distinguished at the center of our Galaxy.
LINK TO LEARNING
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Figure 6.21 Very Long Baseline Array. This map shows the distribution of 10 antennas that constitute an array of radio telescopes
stretching across the United States and its territories.
Recent advances in technology have also made it possible to do interferometry at visible-light and infrared
wavelengths. At the beginning of the twenty-first century, three observatories with multiple telescopes each
began using their dishes as interferometers, combining their light to obtain a much greater resolution. In
addition, a dedicated interferometric array was built on Mt. Wilson in California. Just as in radio arrays, these
observations allow astronomers to make out more detail than a single telescope could provide.
Visible-Light Interferometers
Longest
Baseline (m)
Telescope Name
Location
Mirrors
Status
CHARA Array (Center for High Angular
Resolution Astronomy)
Mount
Wilson, CA
Six 1-m
telescopes
Operational
since 2004
Very Large Telescope
Cerro
Paranal,
Chile
Four 8.2-m
telescopes
Completed 2000
Keck I and II telescopes
Maunakea,
HI
Two 10-m
telescopes
Operated from
2001 to 2012
22.8
Large Binocular Telescope
Mount
Graham, AZ
Two 8.4-m
telescopes
First light 2004
Table 6.3
Radar Astronomy
Radar is the technique of transmitting radio waves to an object in our solar system and then detecting the
radio radiation that the object reflects back. The time required for the round trip can be measured
electronically with great precision. Because we know the speed at which radio waves travel (the speed of light),
we can determine the distance to the object or a particular feature on its surface (such as a mountain).
Radar observations have been used to determine the distances to planets and how fast things are moving in
the solar system (using the Doppler effect, discussed in the Radiation and Spectra chapter). Radar waves have
played important roles in navigating spacecraft throughout the solar system. In addition, as will be discussed
in later chapters, radar observations have determined the rotation periods of Venus and Mercury, probed tiny
Earth-approaching asteroids, and allowed us to investigate the mountains and valleys on the surfaces of
Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the large moons of Jupiter.
Any radio dish can be used as a radar telescope if it is equipped with a powerful transmitter as well as a
6.4 • Radio Telescopes
receiver. For many years, the most spectacular facility in the world for radar astronomy was the 1000-foot
(305-meter) telescope at Arecibo in Puerto Rico (Figure 6.22). The Arecibo telescope was too large to be
pointed directly at different parts of the sky. Instead, it was constructed in a huge natural “bowl” (more than a
mere dish) formed by several hills, and it was lined with reflecting metal panels. A limited ability to track
astronomical sources was achieved by moving the receiver system, which was suspended on cables 100
meters above the surface of the bowl. Unfortunately, the telescope was seriously damaged in the powerful
storms of 2020 and had to be decommissioned. An even larger (500-meter) radar telescope has recently gone
into operation in China and is called the Five-hundred-meter Aperture Spherical Telescope (FAST).
Figure 6.22 Largest Radio and Radar Dish. The Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico was the largest and most powerful astronomical
radar faculty in the world and was often featured in films. In November 2020 it collapsed, damaging the 300-meter diameter “dish”
and destroying the radar transmitter and receiver. (credit: National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, Cornell U., NSF)
6.5
Observations outside Earth’s Atmosphere
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
List the advantages of making astronomical observations from space
Explain the importance of the Hubble Space Telescope
Describe some of the major space-based observatories astronomers use
Earth’s atmosphere blocks most radiation at wavelengths shorter than visible light, so we can only make direct
ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma ray observations from space (though indirect gamma ray observations can be
made from Earth). Getting above the distorting effects of the atmosphere is also an advantage at visible and
infrared wavelengths. The stars don’t “twinkle” in space, so the amount of detail you can observe is limited
only by the size of your instrument. On the other hand, it is expensive to place telescopes into space, and
repairs can present a major challenge. This is why astronomers continue to build telescopes for use on the
ground as well as for launching into space.
Airborne and Space Infrared Telescopes
Water vapor, the main source of atmospheric interference for making infrared observations, is concentrated in
the lower part of Earth’s atmosphere. For this reason, a gain of even a few hundred meters in elevation can
make an important difference in the quality of an infrared observatory site. Given the limitations of high
mountains, most of which attract clouds and violent storms, and the fact that the ability of humans to perform
complex tasks degrades at high altitudes, it was natural for astronomers to investigate the possibility of
observing infrared waves from airplanes and ultimately from space.
Infrared observations from airplanes have been made since the 1960s, starting with a 15-centimeter telescope
on board a Learjet. From 1974 through 1995, NASA operated a 0.9-meter airborne telescope flying regularly
6 • Astronomical Instruments
out of the Ames Research Center south of San Francisco. Observing from an altitude of 12 kilometers, the
telescope was above 99% of the atmospheric water vapor. More recently, NASA (in partnership with the
German Aerospace Center) has constructed a much larger 2.5-meter telescope, called the Stratospheric
Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA), which flies in a modified Boeing 747SP (Figure 6.23).
Figure 6.23 Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA). SOFIA allows observations to be made above most of
Earth’s atmospheric water vapor. (credit: NASA)
To find out more about SOFIA, watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/30SOFIAvid) provided by NASA’s
Armstrong Flight Research Center.
Getting even higher and making observations from space itself have important advantages for infrared
astronomy. First is the elimination of all interference from the atmosphere. Equally important is the
opportunity to cool the entire optical system of the instrument in order to nearly eliminate infrared radiation
from the telescope itself. If we tried to cool a telescope within the atmosphere, it would quickly become coated
with condensing water vapor and other gases, making it useless. Only in the vacuum of space can optical
elements be cooled to hundreds of degrees below freezing and still remain operational.
The first orbiting infrared observatory, launched in 1983, was the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), built as
a joint project by the United States, the Netherlands, and Britain. IRAS was equipped with a 0.6-meter
telescope cooled to a temperature of less than 10 K. For the first time, the infrared sky could be seen as if it
were night, rather than through a bright foreground of atmospheric and telescope emissions. IRAS carried out
a rapid but comprehensive survey of the entire infrared sky over a 10-month period, cataloging about 350,000
sources of infrared radiation. Since then, several other infrared telescopes have operated in space with much
better sensitivity and resolution due to improvements in infrared detectors. The most powerful of these
infrared telescopes is the 0.85-meter Spitzer Space Telescope, which launched in 2003. A few of its
observations are shown in Figure 6.24. With infrared observations, astronomers can detect cooler parts of
cosmic objects, such as the dust clouds around star nurseries and the remnants of dying stars, that visiblelight images don’t reveal.
LINK TO LEARNING
6.5 • Observations outside Earth’s Atmosphere
Figure 6.24 Observations from the Spitzer Space Telescope (SST). These infrared images—a region of star formation, the remnant
of an exploded star, and a region where an old star is losing its outer shell—show just a few of the observations made and
transmitted back to Earth from the SST. Since our eyes are not sensitive to infrared rays, we don’t perceive colors from them. The
colors in these images have been selected by astronomers to highlight details like the composition or temperature in these regions.
(credit “Flame nebula”: modification of work by NASA (X-ray: NASA/CXC/PSU/K.Getman, E.Feigelson, M.Kuhn & the MYStIX team;
Infrared:NASA/JPL-Caltech); credit “Cassiopeia A”: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech; credit “Helix nebula”: modification of
work by NASA/JPL-Caltech)
Hubble Space Telescope
In April 1990, a great leap forward in astronomy was made with the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope
(HST). With an aperture of 2.4 meters, this is the largest telescope put into space so far. (Its aperture was
limited by the size of the payload bay in the Space Shuttle that served as its launch vehicle.) It was named for
Edwin Hubble, the astronomer who discovered the expansion of the universe in the 1920s (whose work we will
discuss in the chapters on Galaxies).
HST is operated jointly by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center and the Space Telescope Science Institute in
Baltimore. It was the first orbiting observatory designed to be serviced by Shuttle astronauts and, over the
years since it was launched, they made several visits to improve or replace its initial instruments and to repair
some of the systems that operate the spacecraft (Figure 6.1)—though this repair program has now been
discontinued, and no more visits or improvements will be made.
With the Hubble, astronomers have obtained some of the most detailed images of astronomical objects from
the solar system outward to the most distant galaxies. Among its many great achievements is the Hubble
Ultra-Deep Field, an image of a small region of the sky observed for almost 100 hours. It contains views of
about 10,000 galaxies, some of which formed when the universe was just a few percent of its current age
(Figure 6.25).
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Figure 6.25 Hubble Ultra-Deep Field (HUDF). The Hubble Space Telescope has provided an image of a specific region of space built
from data collected between September 24, 2003, and January 16, 2004. These data allow us to search for galaxies that existed
approximately 13 billion years ago. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
The HST’s mirror was ground and polished to a remarkable degree of accuracy. If we were to scale up its
2.4-meter mirror to the size of the entire continental United States, there would be no hill or valley larger than
about 6 centimeters in its smooth surface. Unfortunately, after it was launched, scientists discovered that the
primary mirror had a slight error in its shape, equal to roughly 1/50 the width of a human hair. Small as that
sounds, it was enough to ensure that much of the light entering the telescope did not come to a clear focus
and that all the images were blurry. (In a misplaced effort to save money, a complete test of the optical system
had not been carried out before launch, so the error was not discovered until HST was in orbit.)
The solution was to do something very similar to what we do for astronomy students with blurry vision: put
corrective optics in front of their eyes. In December 1993, in one of the most exciting and difficult space
missions ever flown, astronauts captured the orbiting telescope and brought it back into the shuttle payload
bay. There they installed a package containing compensating optics as well as a new, improved camera before
releasing HST back into orbit. The telescope now works as it was intended to, and further missions to it were
able to install even more advanced instruments to take advantage of its capabilities.
High-Energy Observatories
Ultraviolet, X-ray, and direct gamma-ray (high-energy electromagnetic wave) observations can be made only
from space. Such observations first became possible in 1946, with V2 rockets captured from Germany after
World War II. The US Naval Research Laboratory put instruments on these rockets for a series of pioneering
flights, used initially to detect ultraviolet radiation from the Sun. Since then, many other rockets have been
launched to make X-ray and ultraviolet observations of the Sun, and later of other celestial objects.
Beginning in the 1960s, a steady stream of high-energy observatories has been launched into orbit to reveal
and explore the universe at short wavelengths. Among recent X-ray telescopes is the Chandra X-ray
Observatory, which was launched in 1999 (Figure 6.26). It is producing X-ray images with unprecedented
resolution and sensitivity. Designing instruments that can collect and focus energetic radiation like X-rays and
gamma rays is an enormous technological challenge. The 2002 Nobel Prize in physics was awarded to Riccardo
Giacconi, a pioneer in the field of building and launching sophisticated X-ray instruments. In 2008, NASA
6.5 • Observations outside Earth’s Atmosphere
launched the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope, designed to measure cosmic gamma rays at energies
greater than any previous telescope, and thus able to collect radiation from some of the most energetic events
in the universe.
Figure 6.26 Chandra X-Ray Satellite. Chandra, the world’s most powerful X-ray telescope, was developed by NASA and launched in
July 1999. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
One major challenge is to design “mirrors” to reflect such penetrating radiation as X-rays and gamma rays,
which normally pass straight through matter. However, although the technical details of design are more
complicated, the three basic components of an observing system, as we explained earlier in this chapter, are
the same at all wavelengths: a telescope to gather up the radiation, filters or instruments to sort the radiation
according to wavelength, and some method of detecting and making a permanent record of the observations.
Table 6.4 lists some of the most important active space observatories that humanity has launched.
Gamma-ray detections can also be made from Earth’s surface by using the atmosphere as the primary
detector. When a gamma ray hits our atmosphere, it accelerates charged particles (mostly electrons) in the
atmosphere. Those energetic particles hit other particles in the atmosphere and give off their own radiation.
The effect is a cascade of light and energy that can be detected on the ground. The VERITAS array in Arizona
and the H.E.S.S. array in Namibia are two such ground-based gamma-ray observatories.
Recent Observatories in Space
Observatory
Date
Operation
Began
Bands of
the
Spectrum
Notes
Website
Hubble Space Telescope
(HST)
visible,
UV, IR
2.4-m mirror;
images and
spectra
www.hubblesite.org
Chandra X-Ray Observatory
X-rays
X-ray images and
spectra
www.chandra.si.edu
Table 6.4
6 • Astronomical Instruments
Observatory
Date
Operation
Began
Bands of
the
Spectrum
Notes
Website
XMM-Newton
X-rays
X-ray
spectroscopy
http://www.cosmos.esa.int/
web/xmm-newton
International Gamma-Ray
Astrophysics Laboratory
(INTEGRAL)
X- and
gammarays
higher resolution
gamma-ray
images
http://sci.esa.int/integral/
Spitzer Space Telescope
IR
0.85-m telescope
www.spitzer.caltech.edu
Fermi Gamma-ray Space
Telescope
gammarays
first high-energy
gamma-ray
observations
fermi.gsfc.nasa.gov
Kepler
visiblelight
planet finder
http://kepler.nasa.gov
Wide-field Infrared Survey
Explorer (WISE)
IR
whole-sky map,
asteroid searches
www.nasa.gov/
mission_pages/WISE/main
Gaia
visiblelight
Precise map of
the Milky Way
http://sci.esa.int/gaia/
Transiting Exoplanet Survey
Satellite (TESS)
visiblelight
Planet finder
http://tess.mit.edu
Table 6.4
6.6
The Future of Large Telescopes
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the next generation of ground- and space-based observatories
Explain some of the challenges involved in building these observatories
If you’ve ever gone on a hike, you have probably been eager to see what lies just around the next bend in the
path. Researchers are no different, and astronomers and engineers are working on the technologies that will
allow us to explore even more distant parts of the universe and to see them more clearly.
The premier space facility planned for the next decade is the James Webb Space Telescope (Figure 6.27), which
was launched on December 25, 2021. James Webb was one of the early administrators in NASA. As we write
this (in December 2021), the telescope is on its way to a stable orbit point, some 1.5 million kilometers from
Earth (where no astronauts can currently travel if the facility needs repair). During its 29-day journey, a
number of activities must be successfully executed in order to prepare the JWST to make observations. A solar
array will be deployed to provide energy, and a sunshield will be stretched out to protect the telescope from
the intense heat of the Sun. The secondary and primary mirrors will then be unfolded. The primary mirror is 6
meters in diameter, made up, like the Keck telescopes, of 36 small hexagons. JWST has been designed to
6.6 • The Future of Large Telescopes
operate at infrared wavelengths and will have the sensitivity needed to detect the very first generation of
stars, formed when the universe was only a few hundred million years old.
Figure 6.27 James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). This image shows some of the mirrors of the JWST as they underwent cryogenic
testing. The mirrors were exposed to extreme temperatures in order to gather accurate measurements on changes in their shape as
they heated and cooled. (credit: NASA/MSFC/David Higginbotham/Emmett Given)
Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/30JWSTvid) to learn more about the James Webb Space Telescope
and how it will build upon the work that Hubble has allowed us to begin in exploring the universe. Visit
NASA's James Webb Space Telescope site (https://openstax.org/l/30JWSTtrack) to keep track of how the
JWST is doing.
On the ground, astronomers have started building the Vera Rubin Observatory1 , which has an 8.4-meter
telescope with a significantly larger field of view than any existing telescopes. It will rapidly scan the sky to find
transients, phenomena that change quickly, such as exploding stars and chunks of rock that orbit near Earth.
It is expected to see first light in 2022.
The international gamma-ray community is planning the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA), two arrays of
telescopes, one in each hemisphere, which will indirectly measure gamma rays from the ground. The CTA will
measure gamma-ray energies a thousand times as great as the Fermi telescope can detect.
Several groups of astronomers around the globe interested in studying visible light and the infrared are
exploring the feasibility of building ground-based telescopes with mirrors larger than 30 meters across. Stop
and think what this means: 30 meters is one-third the length of a football field. It is technically impossible to
build and transport a single astronomical mirror that is 30 meters or larger in diameter. The primary mirror of
these giant telescopes will consist of smaller mirrors, all aligned so that they act as a very large mirror in
combination.
The most ambitious of these projects is the European Extremely Large Telescope (ELT) (Figure 6.28).
(Astronomers try to outdo each other not only with the size of these telescopes, but also their names!) The
design of the European ELT calls for a 39.3-meter primary mirror, which will follow the Keck design and be
made up of 798 hexagonal mirrors, each 1.4 meters in diameter and all held precisely in position so that they
form a continuous surface. Construction on the site in the Atacama Desert in Northern Chile started in 2014,
and operations are expected to begin in about 2025.
International consortia with major contributions from U.S. astronomers have developed plans for the
LINK TO LEARNING
The observatory is named after the American astronomer whose work led us to the understanding that much of the universe is
made of a mysterious substance that scientists call dark matter (which we explain in The Mass of the Galaxy).
6 • Astronomical Instruments
construction of two large new telescopes. One is a Thirty-Meter Telescope (TMT) for which the preferred site is
Maunakea in Hawaii. The design of this telescope is similar to that of the European ELT and will make use of
492 hexagonal elements. Each segment is about 1.44 meters (56.6 inches) across corners. The segments are
closely spaced, with gaps between the segments only 2.5 mm (0.1 inch) wide.
The Giant Magellan Telescope (GMT) is the second ELT project with major participation by U.S. astronomers.
The GMT is also a segmented mirror telescope that employs seven stiff monolith 8.4-meter mirrors as
segments. Construction has started at the selected site, which is near the Las Campanas Observatory on the
southern edge of the Atacama Desert.
These giant telescopes will combine light-gathering power with high-resolution imaging. These powerful new
instruments will enable astronomers to tackle many important astronomical problems. As just one example,
they provide us images and spectra of planets around other stars and thus, perhaps, give us the first real
evidence (from the chemistry of these planets’ atmospheres) that life exists elsewhere.
Figure 6.28 Artist’s Conception of the European Extremely Large Telescope. The primary mirror in this telescope is 39.3 meters
across. The telescope is under construction in the Atacama Desert in Northern Chile. (credit: ESO/L. Calçada)
Check out this fun diagram (https://openstax.org/l/30JWSTdiag) comparing the sizes of the largest planned
and existing telescopes to a regulation basketball and tennis court.
LINK TO LEARNING
6.6 • The Future of Large Telescopes
Key Terms
adaptive optics
systems used with telescopes that can compensate for distortions in an image introduced
by the atmosphere, thus resulting in sharper images
aperture
diameter of the primary lens or mirror of a telescope
charge-coupled device (CCD)
array of high-sensitivity electronic detectors of electromagnetic radiation,
used at the focus of a telescope (or camera lens) to record an image or spectrum
chromatic aberration
distortion that causes an image to appear fuzzy when each wavelength coming into a
transparent material focuses at a different spot
detector
device sensitive to electromagnetic radiation that makes a record of astronomical observations
eyepiece
magnifying lens used to view the image produced by the objective lens or primary mirror of a
telescope
focus
(of telescope) point where the rays of light converged by a mirror or lens meet
interference
process in which waves mix together such that their crests and troughs can alternately
reinforce and cancel one another
interferometer
instrument that combines electromagnetic radiation from one or more telescopes to obtain
a resolution equivalent to what would be obtained with a single telescope with a diameter equal to the
baseline separating the individual separate telescopes
interferometer array
combination of multiple radio dishes to, in effect, work like a large number of two-dish
interferometers
prime focus
point in a telescope where the objective lens or primary mirror focuses the light
radar
technique of transmitting radio waves to an object and then detecting the radiation that the object
reflects back to the transmitter; used to measure the distance to, and motion of, a target object or to form
images of it
reflecting telescope
telescope in which the principal light collector is a concave mirror
refracting telescope
telescope in which the principal light collector is a lens or system of lenses
resolution
detail in an image; specifically, the smallest angular (or linear) features that can be distinguished
seeing
unsteadiness of Earth’s atmosphere, which blurs telescopic images; good seeing means the
atmosphere is steady
telescope
instrument for collecting visible-light or other electromagnetic radiation
Summary
6.1 Telescopes
A telescope collects the faint light from astronomical sources and brings it to a focus, where an instrument can
sort the light according to wavelength. Light is then directed to a detector, where a permanent record is made.
The light-gathering power of a telescope is determined by the diameter of its aperture, or opening—that is, by
the area of its largest or primary lens or mirror. The primary optical element in a telescope is either a convex
lens (in a refracting telescope) or a concave mirror (in a reflector) that brings the light to a focus. Most large
telescopes are reflectors; it is easier to manufacture and support large mirrors because the light does not have
to pass through glass.
6.2 Telescopes Today
New technologies for creating and supporting lightweight mirrors have led to the construction of a number of
large telescopes since 1990. The site for an astronomical observatory must be carefully chosen for clear
weather, dark skies, low water vapor, and excellent atmospheric seeing (low atmospheric turbulence). The
resolution of a visible-light or infrared telescope is degraded by turbulence in Earth’s atmosphere. The
technique of adaptive optics, however, can make corrections for this turbulence in real time and produce
exquisitely detailed images.
6 • Key Terms
6.3 Visible-Light Detectors and Instruments
Visible-light detectors include the human eye, photographic film, and charge-coupled devices (CCDs).
Detectors that are sensitive to infrared radiation must be cooled to very low temperatures since everything in
and near the telescope gives off infrared waves. A spectrometer disperses the light into a spectrum to be
recorded for detailed analysis.
6.4 Radio Telescopes
In the 1930s, radio astronomy was pioneered by Karl G. Jansky and Grote Reber. A radio telescope is basically a
radio antenna (often a large, curved dish) connected to a receiver. Significantly enhanced resolution can be
obtained with interferometers, including interferometer arrays like the 27-element VLA and the 66-element
ALMA. Expanding to very long baseline interferometers, radio astronomers can achieve resolutions as precise
as 0.0001 arcsecond. Radar astronomy involves transmitting as well as receiving. The largest radar telescope
currently in operation is a 305-meter bowl at Arecibo.
6.5 Observations outside Earth’s Atmosphere
Infrared observations are made with telescopes aboard aircraft and in space, as well as from ground-based
facilities on dry mountain peaks. Ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma-ray observations must be made from above
the atmosphere. Many orbiting observatories have been flown to observe in these bands of the spectrum in
the last few decades. The largest-aperture telescope in space is the Hubble Space telescope (HST), the most
significant infrared telescope is Spitzer, and Chandra and Fermi are the premier X-ray and gamma-ray
observatories, respectively.
6.6 The Future of Large Telescopes
New and even larger telescopes are on the drawing boards. The James Webb Space Telescope, a 6-meter
successor to Hubble, is currently scheduled for launch in 2021. Gamma-ray astronomers are planning to build
the CTA to measure very energetic gamma rays. Astronomers are building the LSST to observe with an
unprecedented field of view and a new generation of visible-light/infrared telescopes with apertures of 24.5 to
39 meters in diameter.
For Further Exploration
Articles
Blades, J. C. “Fixing the Hubble One Last Time.” Sky & Telescope (October 2008): 26. On the last Shuttle service
mission and what the Hubble was then capable of doing.
Brown, A. “How Gaia will Map a Billion Stars.” Astronomy (December 2014): 32. Nice review of the mission to
do photometry and spectroscopy of all stars above a certain brightness.
Irion, R. “Prime Time.” Astronomy (February 2001): 46. On how time is allotted on the major research
telescopes.
Jedicke, Peter & Robert. “The Coming Giant Sky Patrols.” Sky & Telescope (September 2008): 30. About giant
telescopes to survey the sky continuously.
Lazio, Joseph, et al. “Tuning in to the Universe: 21st Century Radio Astronomy.” Sky & Telescope (July 2008): 21.
About ALMA and the Square Kilometer Array.
Lowe, Jonathan. “Mirror, Mirror.” Sky & Telescope (December 2007): 22. On the Large Binocular Telescope in
Arizona.
Lowe, Jonathan. “Next Light: Tomorrow’s Monster Telescopes.” Sky & Telescope (April 2008): 20. About plans
for extremely large telescopes on the ground.
6 • For Further Exploration
Mason, Todd & Robin. “Palomar’s Big Eye.” Sky & Telescope (December 2008): 36. On the Hale 200-inch
telescope.
Subinsky, Raymond. “Who Really Invented the Telescope.” Astronomy (August 2008): 84. Brief historical
introduction, focusing on Hans Lippershey.
Young, Monica “The New Space Race (and Problem).” Sky & Telescope (March 2020): 14. A good discussion of
the danger that huge numbers of new reflective satellites (to provide Wi-Fi) poses to the darkness of the night
sky for astronomers.
Websites
Websites for major telescopes are given in Table 6.1, Table 6.2, Table 6.3, and Table 6.4.
Information on Swarms of Satellites on Low-Earth Orbit
•
American Astronomical Society page on the issue with updates and links: https://aas.org/posts/advocacy/
2020/12/impacts-large-satellite-constellations-astronomy-live-updates (https://aas.org/posts/advocacy/
2020/12/impacts-large-satellite-constellations-astronomy-live-updates)
•
Lawler, S. “Space-X’s Starlink Satellites are About to Ruin Stargazing Forever” on the Astronomy magazine
website (November 25, 2020): https://astronomy.com/news/2020/11/spacexs-starlink-satellites-are-aboutto-ruin-stargazing-for-everyone (https://astronomy.com/news/2020/11/spacexs-starlink-satellites-areabout-to-ruin-stargazing-for-everyone)
•
Patel, N. “Satellite Mega-constellations Risk Ruining Astronomy Forever” in Technology Review, September
2, 2020: https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/09/02/1007938/satellite-mega-constellations-riskruining-astronomy-forever/ (https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/09/02/1007938/satellite-megaconstellations-risk-ruining-astronomy-forever/)
Videos
Astronomy from the Stratosphere: SOFIA: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NV98BcBBA9c
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NV98BcBBA9c). A talk by Dr. Dana Backman (1:15:32)
Galaxies Viewed in Full Spectrum of Light: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=368K0iQv8nE
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=368K0iQv8nE). Scientists with the Spitzer Observatory show how a galaxy
looks different at different wavelengths (6:22)
Lifting the Cosmic Veil: Highlights from a Decade of the Spitzer Space Telescope: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=nkrNQcwkY78 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nkrNQcwkY78). A talk by Dr. Michael Bicay
(1:42:44)
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
Most large telescopes get many more proposals for observing projects than there is night observing time
available in a year. Suppose your group is the telescope time allocation committee reporting to an
observatory director. What criteria would you use in deciding how to give out time on the telescope? What
steps could you take to make sure all your colleagues thought the process was fair and people would still
talk to you at future astronomy meetings?
B.
Your group is a committee of nervous astronomers about to make a proposal to the government
ministers of your small European country to chip in with other countries to build the world’s largest
telescope in the high, dry desert of the Chilean Andes Mountains. You expect the government ministers to
be very skeptical about supporting this project. What arguments would you make to convince them to
participate?
C.
The same government ministers we met in the previous activity ask you to draw up a list of the pros and
6 • Collaborative Group Activities
cons of having the world’s largest telescope in the mountains of Chile (instead of a mountain in Europe).
What would your group list in each column?
D.
Your group should discuss and make a list of all the ways in which an observing session at a large visiblelight telescope and a large radio telescope might differ. (Hint: Bear in mind that because the Sun is not
especially bright at many radio wavelengths, observations with radio telescopes can often be done during
the day.)
E.
Another “environmental threat” to astronomy (besides light pollution) comes from the spilling of
terrestrial communications into the “channels”—wavelengths and frequencies—previously reserved for
radio astronomy. For example, the demand for cellular phones means that more and more radio channels
will be used for this purpose. The faint signals from cosmic radio sources could be drowned in a sea of
earthly conversation (translated and sent as radio waves). Assume your group is a congressional
committee being lobbied by both radio astronomers, who want to save some clear channels for doing
astronomy, and the companies that stand to make a lot of money from expanding cellular phone use.
What arguments would sway you to each side?
F.
When the site for the new Thirty-Meter Telescope on Hawaii’s Maunakea was dedicated, a group of native
Hawaiians announced opposition to the project because astronomers were building too many telescopes
on a mountain that native Hawaiians consider a sacred site. You can read more about this controversy at
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/04/science/space/hawaii-court-rescinds-permit-to-build-thirty-metertelescope.html?_r=0 and at http://www.nature.com/news/the-mountain-top-battle-over-the-thirty-metertelescope-1.18446. Once your group has the facts, discuss the claims of each side in the controversy. How
do you think it should be resolved?
G.
If you could propose to use a large modern telescope, what would you want to find out? What telescope
would you use and why?
H.
Light pollution (spilled light in the night sky making it difficult to see the planets and stars) used to be an
issue that concerned mostly astronomers. Now spilled light at night is also of concern to
environmentalists and those worrying about global warming. Can your group come up with some nonastronomical reasons to be opposed to light pollution?
Exercises
Review Questions
1. What are the three basic components of a modern astronomical instrument? Describe each in one to two
sentences.
2. Name the two spectral windows through which electromagnetic radiation easily reaches the surface of
Earth and describe the largest-aperture telescope currently in use for each window.
3. List the largest-aperture single telescope currently in use in each of the following bands of the
electromagnetic spectrum: radio, X-ray, gamma ray.
4. When astronomers discuss the apertures of their telescopes, they say bigger is better. Explain why.
5. The Hooker telescope at Palomar Observatory has a diameter of 5 m, and the Keck I telescope has a
diameter of 10 m. How much more light can the Keck telescope collect than the Hooker telescope in the
same amount of time?
6. What is meant by “reflecting” and “refracting” telescopes?
7. Why are the largest visible-light telescopes in the world made with mirrors rather than lenses?
6 • Exercises
8. Compare the eye, photographic film, and CCDs as detectors for light. What are the advantages and
disadvantages of each?
9. What is a charge-coupled device (CCD), and how is it used in astronomy?
10. Why is it difficult to observe at infrared wavelengths? What do astronomers do to address this difficulty?
11. Radio and radar observations are often made with the same antenna, but otherwise they are very
different techniques. Compare and contrast radio and radar astronomy in terms of the equipment
needed, the methods used, and the kind of results obtained.
12. Look back at Figure 6.18 of Cygnus A and read its caption again. The material in the giant lobes at the
edges of the image had to have been ejected from the center at least how many years ago?
13. Why do astronomers place telescopes in Earth’s orbit? What are the advantages for the different regions
of the spectrum?
14. What was the problem with the Hubble Space Telescope and how was it solved?
15. Describe the techniques radio astronomers use to obtain a resolution comparable to what astronomers
working with visible light can achieve.
16. What kind of visible-light and infrared telescopes on the ground are astronomers planning for the future?
Why are they building them on the ground and not in space?
17. Describe one visible-light or infrared telescope that astronomers are planning to launch into space in the
future.
Thought Questions
18. What happens to the image produced by a lens if the lens is “stopped down” (the aperture reduced,
thereby reducing the amount of light passing through the lens) with an iris diaphragm—a device that
covers its periphery?
19. What would be the properties of an ideal astronomical detector? How closely do the actual properties of a
CCD approach this ideal?
20. Many decades ago, the astronomers on the staff of Mount Wilson and Palomar Observatories each
received about 60 nights per year for their observing programs. Today, an astronomer feels fortunate to
get 10 nights per year on a large telescope. Can you suggest some reasons for this change?
21. The largest observatory complex in the world is on Maunakea, the tallest mountain on Earth. What are
some factors astronomers consider when selecting an observatory site? Don’t forget practical ones.
Should astronomers, for example, consider building an observatory on Denali (Mount McKinley) or Mount
Everest?
22. Suppose you are looking for sites for a visible-light observatory, an infrared observatory, and a radio
observatory. What are the main criteria of excellence for each? What sites are actually considered the best
today?
23. Radio astronomy involves wavelengths much longer than those of visible light, and many orbiting
observatories have probed the universe for radiation of very short wavelengths. What sorts of objects and
physical conditions would you expect to be associated with emission of radiation at very long and very
short wavelengths?
24. The dean of a university located near the ocean (who was not a science major in college) proposes
building an infrared telescope right on campus and operating it in a nice heated dome so that
astronomers will be comfortable on cold winter nights. Criticize this proposal, giving your reasoning.
6 • Exercises
Figuring for Yourself
25. What is the area, in square meters, of a 10-m telescope?
26. Approximately 9000 stars are visible to the naked eye in the whole sky (imagine that you could see around
the entire globe and both the northern and southern hemispheres), and there are about 41,200 square
degrees on the sky. How many stars are visible per square degree? Per square arcsecond?
27. Theoretically (that is, if seeing were not an issue), the resolution of a telescope is inversely proportional to
its diameter. How much better is the resolution of the ALMA when operating at its longest baseline than
the resolution of the Arecibo telescope?
28. In broad daylight, the size of your pupil is typically 3 mm. In dark situations, it expands to about 7 mm.
How much more light can it gather?
29. How much more light can be gathered by a telescope that is 8 m in diameter than by your fully darkadapted eye at 7 mm?
30. How much more light can the Keck telescope (with its 10-m diameter mirror) gather than an amateur
telescope whose mirror is 25 cm (0.25 m) across?
31. People are often bothered when they discover that reflecting telescopes have a second mirror in the
middle to bring the light out to an accessible focus where big instruments can be mounted. “Don’t you
lose light?” people ask. Well, yes, you do, but there is no better alternative. You can estimate how much
light is lost by such an arrangement. The primary mirror (the one at the bottom in Figure 6.6) of the
Gemini North telescope is 8 m in diameter. The secondary mirror at the top is about 1 m in diameter. Use
the formula for the area of a circle to estimate what fraction of the light is blocked by the secondary
mirror.
32. Telescopes can now be operated remotely from a warm room, but until about 25 years ago, astronomers
worked at the telescope to guide it so that it remained pointed in exactly the right place. In a large
telescope, like the Palomar 200-inch telescope, astronomers sat in a cage at the top of the telescope,
where the secondary mirror is located, as shown in Figure 6.6. Assume for the purpose of your calculation
that the diameter of this cage was 40 inches. What fraction of the light is blocked?
33. The HST cost about $1.7 billion for construction and $300 million for its shuttle launch, and it costs $250
million per year to operate. If the telescope lasts for 20 years, what is the total cost per year? Per day? If
the telescope can be used just 30% of the time for actual observations, what is the cost per hour and per
minute for the astronomer’s observing time on this instrument? What is the cost per person in the United
States? Was your investment in the Hubble Space telescope worth it?
34. How much more light can the James Webb Space Telescope (with its 6-m diameter mirror) gather than the
Hubble Space Telescope (with a diameter of 2.4 m)?
35. The Palomar telescope’s 5-m mirror weighs 14.5 tons. If a 10-m mirror were constructed of the same
thickness as Palomar’s (only bigger), how much would it weigh?
6 • Exercises
6 • Exercises
