Figure 11.1 Giant Planets. The four giant planets in our solar system all have hydrogen atmospheres, but the warm gas giants,
Jupiter and Saturn, have tan, beige, red, and white clouds that are thought to be composed of ammonia ice particles with various
colorants called “chromophores.” The blue-tinted ice giants, Uranus and Neptune, are much colder and covered in methane ice
clouds. (credit: modification of work by Lunar and Planetary Institute, NASA)
Chapter Outline
11.1 Exploring the Outer Planets
11.2 The Giant Planets
11.3 Atmospheres of the Giant Planets
Thinking Ahead
What do we learn about the Earth by studying the planets? Humility.
—Andrew Ingersoll discussing the results of the Voyager mission in 1986.
Beyond Mars and the asteroid belt, we encounter a new region of the solar system: the realm of the giants.
Temperatures here are lower, permitting water and other volatiles to condense as ice. The planets are much
larger, distances between them are much greater, and each giant world is accompanied by an extensive
system of moons and rings.
From many perspectives, the outer solar system is where the action is, and the giant planets are the most
important members of the Sun’s family. When compared to these outer giants, the little cinders of rock and
metal that orbit closer to the Sun can seem insignificant. These four giant worlds—Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune—are the subjects of this chapter. Their rings, moons, and the dwarf planet Pluto are discussed in a
later chapter.
The Giant Planets
11 • Thinking Ahead
11.1
Exploring the Outer Planets
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Provide an overview of the composition of the giant planets
Chronicle the robotic exploration of the outer solar system
Summarize the missions sent to orbit the gas giants
The giant planets hold most of the mass in our planetary system. Jupiter alone exceeds the mass of all the
other planets combined (Figure 11.2). The material available to build these planets can be divided into three
classes by what they are made of: “gases,” “ices,” and “rocks” (see Table 11.1). The “gases” are primarily
hydrogen and helium, the most abundant elements in the universe. The way it is used here, the term “ices”
refers to composition only and not whether a substance is actually in a solid state. “Ices” means compounds
that form from the next most abundant elements: oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. Common ices are water,
methane, and ammonia, but ices may also include carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and others. “Rocks” are
even less abundant than ices, and include everything else: magnesium, silicon, iron, and so on.
Figure 11.2 Jupiter. The Cassini spacecraft imaged Jupiter on its way to Saturn in 2012. The giant storm system called the Great Red
Spot is visible to the lower right. The dark spot to the lower left is the shadow of Jupiter’s moon Europa. (credit: modification of work
by NASA/JPL)
Abundances in the Outer Solar System
Type of Material
Name
Approximate % (by Mass)
Gas
Hydrogen (H2)
Gas
Helium (He)
Ice
Water (H2O)
0.6
Ice
Methane (CH4)
0.4
Table 11.1
11 • The Giant Planets
Type of Material
Name
Approximate % (by Mass)
Ice
Ammonia (NH3)
0.1
Rock
Magnesium (Mg), iron (Fe), silicon (Si)
0.3
Table 11.1
In the outer solar system, gases dominate the two largest planets, Jupiter and Saturn, hence their nickname
“gas giants.” Uranus and Neptune are sometimes called “ice giants” because their interiors contain far more
of the “ice” component than their larger cousins. The chemistry for all four giant planet atmospheres is
dominated by hydrogen. This hydrogen caused the chemistry of the outer solar system to become reducing,
meaning that other elements tend to combine with hydrogen first. In the early solar system, most of the
oxygen combined with hydrogen to make H2O and was thus unavailable to form the kinds of oxidized
compounds with other elements that are more familiar to us in the inner solar system (such as CO2). As a
result, the compounds detected in the atmosphere of the giant planets are mostly hydrogen-based gases such
as methane (CH4) and ammonia (NH3), or more complex hydrocarbons (combinations of hydrogen and
carbon) such as ethane (C2H6) and acetylene (C2H2).
Exploration of the Outer Solar System So Far
Eight spacecraft, seven from the United States and one from Europe, have penetrated beyond the asteroid belt
into the realm of the giants. Table 11.2 summarizes the spacecraft missions to the outer solar system.
Missions to the Giant Planets
Planet
Spacecraft1
Encounter Date
Type
Jupiter
Pioneer 10
December 1973
Flyby
Pioneer 11
December 1974
Flyby
Voyager 1
March 1979
Flyby
Voyager 2
July 1979
Flyby
Ulysses
February 1992
Flyby during gravity assist
Galileo
December 1995
Orbiter and probe
Cassini
December 2002
Flyby
New Horizons
February 2007
Flyby during gravity assist
Juno
July 2016
Orbiter
Saturn
Pioneer 11
September 1979
Flyby
Table 11.2
Both the Ulysses and the New Horizons spacecraft (designed to study the Sun and Pluto, respectively) flew past Jupiter for a
11.1 • Exploring the Outer Planets
Planet
Spacecraft1
Encounter Date
Type
Voyager 1
November 1980
Flyby
Voyager 2
August 1981
Flyby
Cassini
July 2004
Orbiter
Uranus
Voyager 2
January 1986
Flyby
Neptune
Voyager 2
August 1989
Flyby
Table 11.2
The challenges of exploring so far away from Earth are considerable. Flight times to the giant planets are
measured in years to decades, rather than the months required to reach Venus or Mars. Even at the speed of
light, messages take hours to pass between Earth and the spacecraft. If a problem develops near Saturn, for
example, a wait of hours for the alarm to reach Earth and for instructions to be routed back to the spacecraft
could spell disaster. Spacecraft to the outer solar system must therefore be highly reliable and capable of a
greater degree of independence and autonomy. Outer solar system missions also must carry their own power
sources since the Sun is too far away to provide enough energy, or else they must have very large arrays of
solar cells. Heaters are required to keep instruments at proper operating temperatures, and spacecraft must
have radio transmitters powerful enough to send their data to receivers on distant Earth.
The first spacecraft to investigate the regions past Mars were the NASA Pioneers 10 and 11, launched in 1972
and 1973 as pathfinders to Jupiter. One of their main objectives was simply to determine whether a spacecraft
could actually navigate through the belt of asteroids that lies beyond Mars without getting destroyed by
collisions with asteroidal dust. Another objective was to measure the radiation hazards in the magnetosphere
(or zone of magnetic influence) of Jupiter. Both spacecraft passed through the asteroid belt without incident,
but the energetic particles in Jupiter’s magnetic field nearly wiped out their electronics, providing information
necessary for the safe design of subsequent missions.
Pioneer 10 flew past Jupiter in 1973, after which it sped outward toward the limits of the solar system. Pioneer
11 undertook a more ambitious program, using the gravity of Jupiter to aim for Saturn, which it reached in
1979. The twin Voyager spacecraft launched the next wave of outer planet exploration in 1977. Voyagers 1 and
2 each carried 11 scientific instruments, including cameras and spectrometers, as well as devices to measure
the characteristics of planetary magnetospheres. Since they kept going outward after their planetary
encounters, these are now the most distant spacecraft ever launched by humanity.
Voyager 1 reached Jupiter in 1979 and used a gravity assist from that planet to take it on to Saturn in 1980.
Voyager 2 arrived at Jupiter four months later, but then followed a different path to visit all the outer planets,
reaching Saturn in 1981, Uranus in 1986, and Neptune in 1989. This trajectory was made possible by the
approximate alignment of the four giant planets on the same side of the Sun. About once every 175 years,
these planets are in such a position, and it allows a single spacecraft to visit them all by using gravity-assisted
flybys to adjust course for each subsequent encounter; such a maneuver has been nicknamed a “Grand Tour”
by astronomers.
gravity boost (gaining energy by “stealing” a little bit from the giant planet’s rotation).
11 • The Giant Planets
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory has a nice video called Voyager: The Grand Tour (https://openstax.org/l/
30JPLGrandT) that describes the Voyager mission and what it found.
Engineering and Space Science: Teaching an Old Spacecraft New Tricks
By the time Voyager 2 arrived at Neptune in 1989, 12 years after its launch, the spacecraft was beginning to
show signs of old age. The arm on which the camera and other instruments were located was “arthritic”: it
could no longer move easily in all directions. The communications system was “hard of hearing”: part of its
radio receiver had stopped working. The “brains” had significant “memory loss”: some of the onboard
computer memory had failed. And the whole spacecraft was beginning to run out of energy: its generators
had begun showing serious signs of wear.
To make things even more of a challenge, Voyager’s mission at Neptune was in many ways the most
difficult of all four flybys. For example, since sunlight at Neptune is 900 times weaker than at Earth, the
onboard camera had to take much longer exposures in this light-starved environment. This was a nontrivial
requirement, given that the spacecraft was hurtling by Neptune at ten times the speed of a rifle bullet.
The solution was to swivel the camera backward at exactly the rate that would compensate for the forward
motion of the spacecraft. Engineers had to preprogram the ship’s computer to execute an incredibly
complex series of maneuvers for each image. The beautiful Voyager images of Neptune are a testament to
the ingenuity of spacecraft engineers.
The sheer distance of the craft from its controllers on Earth was yet another challenge. Voyager 2 received
instructions and sent back its data via on-board radio transmitter. The distance from Earth to Neptune is
about 4.8 billion kilometers. Over this vast distance, the power that reached us from Voyager 2 at Neptune
was approximately10–16 watts, or 20 billion times less power than it takes to operate a digital watch. Thirtyeight different antennas on four continents were used by NASA to collect the faint signals from the
spacecraft and decode the precious information about Neptune that they contained.
Enter the Orbiters: Galileo, Cassini, and Juno
The Pioneer and Voyager missions were flybys of the giant planets: they each produced only quick looks
before the spacecraft sped onward. For more detailed studies of these worlds, we require spacecraft that can
go into orbit around a planet. For Jupiter and Saturn, these orbiters were the Galileo, Cassini, and Juno
spacecraft. To date, no orbiter missions have been started for Uranus and Neptune, although planetary
scientists have expressed keen interest.
The Galileo spacecraft was launched toward Jupiter in 1989 and arrived in 1995. Galileo began its investigations
by deploying an entry probe into Jupiter, for the first direct studies of the planet’s outer atmospheric layers.
The probe plunged at a shallow angle into Jupiter’s atmosphere, traveling at a speed of 50 kilometers per
second—that’s fast enough to fly from New York to San Francisco in 100 seconds! This was the highest speed
at which any probe has so far entered the atmosphere of a planet, and it put great demands on the heat shield
protecting it. The high entry speed was a result of acceleration by the strong gravitational attraction of Jupiter.
Atmospheric friction slowed the probe within 2 minutes, producing temperatures at the front of its heat shield
LINK TO LEARNING
MAKING CONNECTIONS
11.1 • Exploring the Outer Planets
as high as 15,000 °C. As the probe’s speed dropped to 2500 kilometers per hour, the remains of the glowing
heat shield were jettisoned, and a parachute was deployed to lower the instrumented probe spacecraft more
gently into the atmosphere (Figure 11.3). The data from the probe instruments were relayed to Earth via the
main Galileo spacecraft.
Figure 11.3 Galileo Probe Falling into Jupiter and Juno Image of Jupiter's South Pole. (a) This artist’s depiction shows the Galileo
probe descending into the clouds via parachute just after the protective heat shield separated. The probe made its measurements of
Jupiter’s atmosphere on December 7, 1995. (b) This Juno image, taken in 2017 from about 100,000 kilometers above the cloudtops,
shows the south polar region of Jupiter with its dramatic complex of storms and clouds. The enhanced-color image was processed
for NASA/JPL by citizen scientist John Landino. (credit a: modification of work by NASA/Ames Research Center; credit b: modification
of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech/SwRI/MSSS/John Landino)
The probe continued to operate for an hour, descending 200 kilometers into the atmosphere. A few minutes
later the polyester parachute melted, and within a few hours the main aluminum and titanium structure of the
probe vaporized to become a part of Jupiter itself. About 2 hours after receipt of the final probe data, the main
spacecraft fired its retro-rockets so it could be captured into orbit around the planet, where its primary
objectives were to study Jupiter’s large and often puzzling moons.
The Cassini mission to Saturn (Figure 11.4), a cooperative venture between NASA and the European Space
Agency, was similar to Galileo in its two-fold approach. Launched in 1997, Cassini arrived in 2004 and went into
orbit around Saturn, beginning extensive studies of its rings and moons, as well as the planet itself. In January
2005, Cassini deployed an entry probe into the atmosphere of Saturn’s large moon, Titan, where it successfully
landed on the surface. (We’ll discuss the probe and what it found in the chapter on Rings, Moons, and Pluto.)
The Voyager and Galileo missions to Jupiter were primarily designed to study the moons and the atmosphere
of the planet. The next NASA mission, an orbiter called Juno, arrived at Jupiter in July 2016. In order to meet its
objectives of studying the jovian magnetosphere, it has a very elongated (eccentric) 55-day orbit, that takes it
from 4 thousand kilometers above the cloud tops out to 76 thousand kilometers. The orbit takes the craft over
Jupiter’s poles, giving us remarkable close-ups of the polar regions (previous spacecraft viewed the planet
from lower latitudes).
Juno was originally designed without a camera, but fortunately scientists rectified this omission, adding a
simple downward-looking color camera to use during close passes by Jupiter. Recognizing the value of such
images, both scientific and artistic, it was decided to post the raw images and encourage “citizen scientists” to
process them. The product has been many dramatic, brightly colored views of Jupiter, such as Figure 11.3.
11 • The Giant Planets
Figure 11.4 Earth as Seen from Saturn. This popular Cassini image shows Earth as a tiny dot (marked with an arrow) seen below
Saturn’s rings. It was taken in July 2013, when Saturn was 1.4 billion kilometers from Earth. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL-
Caltech/Space Science Institute)
11.2
The Giant Planets
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the basic physical characteristics, general appearance, and rotation of the giant planets
Describe the composition and structure of Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune
Compare and contrast the internal heat sources of the giant planets
Describe the discovery and characteristics of the giant planets’ magnetic fields
Let us now examine the four giant (or jovian) planets in more detail. Our approach is not just to catalog their
characteristics, but to compare them with each other, noting their similarities and differences and attempting
to relate their properties to their differing masses and distances from the Sun.
Basic Characteristics
The giant planets are very far from the Sun. Jupiter is more than five times farther from the Sun than Earth’s
distance (5 AU), and takes just under 12 years to circle the Sun. Saturn is about twice as far away as Jupiter
(almost 10 AU) and takes nearly 30 years to complete one orbit. Uranus orbits at 19 AU with a period of 84
years, while Neptune, at 30 AU, requires 165 years for each circuit of the Sun. These long timescales make it
difficult for us short-lived humans to study seasonal change on the outer planets.
Jupiter and Saturn have many similarities in composition and internal structure, although Jupiter is nearly four
times more massive. Uranus and Neptune are smaller and differ in composition and internal structure from
their large siblings. Some of the main properties of these four planets are summarized in Table 11.3.
11.2 • The Giant Planets
Basic Properties of the Jovian Planets
Planet
Distance
(AU)
Period
(years)
Diameter
(km)
Mass
(Earth = 1)
Density
(g/cm3)
Rotation
(hours)
Jupiter
5.2
11.9
142,800
1.3
9.9
Saturn
9.5
29.5
120,540
0.7
10.7
Uranus
19.2
84.1
51,200
1.3
17.2
Neptune
30.0
164.8
49,500
1.6
16.1
Table 11.3
Jupiter, the giant among giants, has enough mass to make 318 Earths. Its diameter is about 11 times that of
Earth (and about one tenth that of the Sun). Jupiter’s average density is 1.3 g/cm3, much lower than that of any
of the terrestrial planets. (Recall that water has a density of 1 g/cm3.) Jupiter’s material is spread out over a
volume so large that about 1,300 Earths could fit within it.
Saturn’s mass is 95 times that of Earth, and its average density is only 0.7 g/cm3—the lowest of any planet.
Since this is less than the density of water, Saturn would be light enough to float.
Uranus and Neptune each have a mass about 15 times that of Earth and, hence, are only 5% as massive as
Jupiter. Their densities of 1.3 g/cm3 and 1.6 g/cm3, respectively, are much higher than that of Saturn. This is
one piece of evidence that tells us that their composition must differ fundamentally from the gas giants. When
astronomers began to discover other planetary systems (exoplanets), we found that planets the size of Uranus
and Neptune are common, and that there are even more exoplanets intermediate in size between Earth and
these ice giants, a type of planet not found in our solar system.
Appearance and Rotation
When we look at the planets, we see only their atmospheres, composed primarily of hydrogen and helium gas
(see Figure 11.1). The uppermost clouds of Jupiter and Saturn, the part we see when looking down at these
planets from above, are composed of ammonia crystals. On Neptune, the upper clouds are made of methane.
On Uranus, we see no obvious cloud layer at all, but only a deep and featureless haze.
Seen through a telescope, Jupiter is a colorful and dynamic planet. Distinct details in its cloud patterns allow us
to determine the rotation rate of its atmosphere at the cloud level, although such atmosphere rotation may
have little to do with the spin of the underlying planet. Much more fundamental is the rotation of the mantle
and core; these can be determined by periodic variations in radio waves coming from Jupiter, which are
controlled by its magnetic field. Since the magnetic field (which we will discuss below) originates deep inside
the planet, it shares the rotation of the interior. The rotation period we measure in this way is 9 hours 56
minutes, which gives Jupiter the shortest “day” of any planet. In the same way, we can measure that the
underlying rotation period of Saturn is 10 hours 40 minutes. Uranus and Neptune have slightly longer rotation
periods of about 17 hours, also determined from the rotation of their magnetic fields.
A brief video made from Hubble Space Telescope photos shows the rotation of Jupiter
LINK TO LEARNING
11 • The Giant Planets
(https://openstax.org/l/30HSTJupRot) with its many atmospheric features.
Remember that Earth and Mars have seasons because their spin axes, instead of “standing up straight,” are
tilted relative to the orbital plane of the solar system. This means that as Earth revolves around the Sun,
sometimes one hemisphere and sometimes the other “leans into” the Sun.
What are the seasons like for the giant planets? The spin axis of Jupiter is tilted by only 3°, so there are no
seasons to speak of. Saturn, however, does have seasons, since its spin axis is inclined at 27° to the
perpendicular to its orbit. Neptune has about the same tilt as Saturn (29°); therefore, it experiences similar
seasons (only more slowly). The strangest seasons of all are on Uranus, which has a spin axis tilted by 98° with
respect to the north direction. Practically speaking, we can say that Uranus orbits on its side, and its ring and
moon system follow along, orbiting about Uranus’ equator (Figure 11.5).
Figure 11.5 Infrared Image of Uranus. The infrared camera on the Hubble Space Telescope took these false-color images of the
planet Uranus, its ring system, and moons in 1997. The south pole of the planet (marked with a “+” on the right image) faces the
Sun; its green color shows a strong local haze. The two images were taken 90 minutes apart, and during that time the five reddish
clouds can be seen to rotate around the parallel to the equator. The rings (which are very faint in the visible light, but prominent in
infrared) and eight moons can be seen around the equator. This was the “bull’s eye” arrangement that Voyager saw as it
approached Uranus in 1986. (credit: modification of work by Erich Karkoschka (University of Arizona), and NASA/ESA)
We don’t know what caused Uranus to be tipped over like this, but one possibility is a collision with a large
planetary body when our system was first forming. Whatever the cause, this unusual tilt creates dramatic
seasons. When Voyager 2 arrived at Uranus, its south pole was facing directly into the Sun. The southern
hemisphere was experiencing a 21-year sunlit summer, while during that same period the northern
hemisphere was plunged into darkness. For the next 21-year season, the Sun shines on Uranus’ equator, and
both hemispheres go through cycles of light and dark as the planet rotates (Figure 11.6). Then there are 21
years of an illuminated northern hemisphere and a dark southern hemisphere. After that the pattern of
alternating day and night repeats.
Just as on Earth, the seasons are even more extreme at the poles. If you were to install a floating platform at
the south pole of Uranus, for example, it would experience 42 years of light and 42 years of darkness. Any
future astronauts crazy enough to set up camp there could spend most of their lives without ever seeing the
Sun.
11.2 • The Giant Planets
Figure 11.6 Strange Seasons on Uranus. (a) This diagram shows the orbit of Uranus as seen from above. At the time Voyager 2
arrived (position 1), the South Pole was facing the Sun. As we move counterclockwise in the diagram, we see the planet 21 years later
at each step. (b) This graph compares the amount of sunlight seen at the poles and the equator of Uranus over the course of its
84-year revolution around the Sun.
Composition and Structure
Although we cannot see into these planets, astronomers are confident that the interiors of Jupiter and Saturn
are composed primarily of hydrogen and helium. Of course, these gases have been measured only in their
atmosphere, but calculations first carried out more than 50 years ago showed that these two light gases are
the only possible materials out of which a planet with the observed masses and densities of Jupiter and Saturn
could be constructed.
The deep internal structures of these two planets are difficult to predict. This is mainly because these planets
are so big that the hydrogen and helium in their centers become tremendously compressed and behave in
ways that these gases can never behave on Earth. The best theoretical models we have of Jupiter’s structure
predict a central pressure greater than 100 million bars and a central density of about 31 g/cm3. (By contrast,
Earth’s core has a central pressure of 4 million bars and a central density of 17 g/cm3.)
At the pressures inside the giant planets, familiar materials can take on strange forms. A few thousand
kilometers below the visible clouds of Jupiter and Saturn, pressures become so great that hydrogen changes
from a gaseous to a liquid state. Still deeper, this liquid hydrogen is further compressed and begins to act like
a metal, something it never does on Earth. (In a metal, electrons are not firmly attached to their parent nuclei
but can wander around. This is why metals are such good conductors of electricity.) On Jupiter, the greater
part of the interior is liquid metallic hydrogen.
Because Saturn is less massive, it has only a small volume of metallic hydrogen, but most of its interior is
liquid. Uranus and Neptune are too small to reach internal pressures sufficient to liquefy hydrogen. We will
return to the discussion of the metallic hydrogen layers when we examine the magnetic fields of the giant
planets.
Each of these planets has a core composed of heavier materials, as demonstrated by detailed analyses of their
gravitational fields. Presumably these cores are the original rock-and-ice bodies that formed before the
capture of gas from the surrounding nebula. The cores exist at pressures of tens of millions of bars. While
scientists speak of the giant planet cores being composed of rock and ice, we can be sure that neither rock nor
ice assumes any familiar forms at such pressures and temperatures. Remember that what is really meant by
“rock” is any material made up primarily of iron, silicon, and oxygen, while the term “ice” in this chapter
denotes materials composed primarily of the elements carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen in combination with
hydrogen.
11 • The Giant Planets
Figure 11.7 illustrates the likely interior structures of the four jovian planets. It appears that all four have
similar cores of rock and ice. On Jupiter and Saturn, the cores constitute only a few percent of the total mass,
consistent with the initial composition of raw materials shown in Table 11.1. However, most of the mass of
Uranus and Neptune resides in these cores, demonstrating that the two outer planets were unable to attract
massive quantities of hydrogen and helium when they were first forming.
Figure 11.7 Internal Structures of the Jovian Planets. Jupiter and Saturn are composed primarily of hydrogen and helium (but
hydrogen dominates), but Uranus and Neptune consist in large part of compounds of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. (The diagrams
are drawn to scale; numbers show radii in thousands of kilometers.)
Internal Heat Sources
Because of their large sizes, all the giant planets were strongly heated during their formation by the collapse
of surrounding material onto their cores. Jupiter, being the largest, was the hottest. Some of this primordial
heat can still remain inside such large planets. In addition, it is possible for giant, largely gaseous planets to
generate heat after formation by slowly contracting. (With so large a mass, even a minuscule amount of
shrinking can generate significant heat.) The effect of these internal energy sources is to raise the
temperatures in the interiors and atmospheres of the planets higher than we would expect from the heating
effect of the Sun alone.
Jupiter has the largest internal energy source, amounting to 4 × 1017 watts; that is, it is heated from inside with
energy equivalent to 4 million billion 100-watt lightbulbs. This energy is about the same as the total solar
energy absorbed by Jupiter. The atmosphere of Jupiter is therefore something of a cross between a normal
planetary atmosphere (like Earth’s), which obtains most of its energy from the Sun, and the atmosphere of a
star, which is entirely heated by an internal energy source. Most of the internal energy of Jupiter is primordial
heat, left over from the formation of the planet 4.5 billion years ago.
Saturn has an internal energy source about half as large as that of Jupiter, which means (since its mass is only
about one quarter as great) that it is producing twice as much energy per kilogram of material as does Jupiter.
Since Saturn is expected to have much less primordial heat, there must be another source at work generating
most of this 2 × 1017 watts of power. This source is the separation of helium from hydrogen in Saturn’s interior.
In the liquid hydrogen mantle, the heavier helium forms droplets that sink toward the core, releasing
gravitational energy. In effect, Saturn is still differentiating—letting lighter material rise and heavier material
fall.
Uranus and Neptune are different. Neptune has a small internal energy source, while Uranus does not emit a
measurable amount of internal heat. As a result, these two planets have almost the same atmospheric
11.2 • The Giant Planets
temperature, in spite of Neptune’s greater distance from the Sun. No one knows why these two planets differ
in their internal heat, but all this shows how nature can contrive to make each world a little bit different from
its neighbors.
Magnetic Fields
Each of the giant planets has a strong magnetic field, generated by electric currents in its rapidly spinning
interior. Associated with the magnetic fields are the planets’ magnetospheres, which are regions around the
planet within which the planet’s own magnetic field dominates over the general interplanetary magnetic field.
The magnetospheres of these planets are their largest features, extending millions of kilometers into space.
In the late 1950s, astronomers discovered that Jupiter was a source of radio waves that got more intense at
longer rather than at shorter wavelengths—just the reverse of what is expected from thermal radiation
(radiation caused by the normal vibrations of particles within all matter). Such behavior is typical, however, of
the radiation emitted when high-speed electrons are accelerated by a magnetic field. We call this synchrotron
radiation because it was first observed on Earth in particle accelerators, called synchrotrons. This was our first
hint that Jupiter must have a strong magnetic field.
Later observations showed that the radio waves are coming from a region surrounding Jupiter with a diameter
several times that of the planet itself (Figure 11.8). The evidence suggested that a vast number of charged
atomic particles must be circulating around Jupiter, spiraling around the lines of force of a magnetic field
associated with the planet. This is just what we observe happening, but on a smaller scale, in the Van Allen belt
around Earth. The magnetic fields of Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, discovered by the spacecraft that first
passed close to these planets, work in a similar way, but are not as strong.
Figure 11.8 Jupiter in Radio Waves. This false-color image of Jupiter was made with the Very Large Array (of radio telescopes) in
New Mexico. We see part of the magnetosphere, brightest in the middle because the largest number of charged particles are in the
equatorial zone of Jupiter. The planet itself is slightly smaller than the green oval in the center. Different colors are used to indicate
different intensities of synchrotron radiation. (credit: modification of work by I. de Pater (UC Berkeley) NRAO, AUI, NSF)
Learn more about the magnetosphere of Jupiter (https://openstax.org/l/30NASAJupMag) and why we
continue to be interested in it from this brief NASA video.
Inside each magnetosphere, charged particles spiral around in the magnetic field; as a result, they can be
accelerated to high energies. These charged particles can come from the Sun or from the neighborhood of the
planet itself. In Jupiter’s case, Io, one of its moons, turns out to have volcanic eruptions that blast charged
LINK TO LEARNING
11 • The Giant Planets
particles into space and right into the jovian magnetosphere.
The axis of Jupiter’s magnetic field (the line that connects the magnetic north pole with the magnetic south
pole) is not aligned exactly with the axis of rotation of the planet; rather, it is tipped by about 10°. Uranus and
Neptune have even greater magnetic tilts, of 60° and 55°, respectively. Saturn’s field, on the other hand, is
perfectly aligned with its rotation axis. Why different planets have such different magnetic tilts is not well
understood.
The physical processes around the jovian planets turn out to be milder versions of what astronomers find in
many distant objects, from the remnants of dead stars to the puzzling distant powerhouses we call quasars.
One reason to study the magnetospheres of the giant planets and Earth is that they provide nearby accessible
analogues of more energetic and challenging cosmic processes.
11.3
Atmospheres of the Giant Planets
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Discuss the atmospheric composition of the giant planets
Describe the cloud formation and atmospheric structure of the gas giants
Characterize the giant planets’ wind and weather patterns
Understand the scale and longevity of storms on the giant planets
The atmospheres of the jovian planets are the parts we can observe or measure directly. Since these planets
have no solid surfaces, their atmospheres are more representative of their general compositions than is the
case with the terrestrial planets. These atmospheres also present us with some of the most dramatic examples
of weather patterns in the solar system. As we will see, storms on these planets can grow bigger than the
entire planet Earth.
Atmospheric Composition
When sunlight reflects from the atmospheres of the giant planets, the atmospheric gases leave their
“fingerprints” in the spectrum of light. Spectroscopic observations of the jovian planets began in the
nineteenth century, but for a long time, astronomers were not able to interpret the spectra they observed. As
late as the 1930s, the most prominent features photographed in these spectra remained unidentified. Then
better spectra revealed the presence of molecules of methane (CH4) and ammonia (NH3) in the atmospheres
of Jupiter and Saturn.
At first astronomers thought that methane and ammonia might be the main constituents of these
atmospheres, but now we know that hydrogen and helium are actually the dominant gases. The confusion
arose because neither hydrogen nor helium possesses easily detected spectral features in the visible
spectrum. It was not until the Voyager spacecraft measured the far-infrared spectra of Jupiter and Saturn that
a reliable abundance for the elusive helium could be found.
The compositions of the two atmospheres are generally similar, except that on Saturn there is less helium as
the result of the precipitation of helium that contributes to Saturn’s internal energy source. The most precise
measurements of composition were made on Jupiter by the Galileo entry probe in 1995; as a result, we know
the abundances of some elements in the jovian atmosphere even better than we know those in the Sun.
11.3 • Atmospheres of the Giant Planets
James Van Allen: Several Planets under His Belt
The career of physicist James Van Allen spanned the birth and growth of the space age, and he played a
major role in its development. Born in Iowa in 1914, Van Allen received his PhD from the University of Iowa.
He then worked for several research institutions and served in the Navy during World War II.
After the war, Van Allen (Figure 11.9) was appointed Professor of Physics at the University of Iowa. He and
his collaborators began using rockets to explore cosmic radiation in Earth’s outer atmosphere. To reach
extremely high altitudes, Van Allen designed a technique in which a balloon lifts and then launches a small
rocket (the rocket is nicknamed “the rockoon”).
Figure 11.9 James Van Allen (1914–2006). In this 1950s photograph, Van Allen holds a “rockoon.” (credit: modification of work
by Frederick W. Kent Collection, University of Iowa Archives)
Over dinner one night in 1950, Van Allen and several colleagues came up with the idea of the International
Geophysical Year (IGY), an opportunity for scientists around the world to coordinate their investigations of
the physics of Earth, especially research done at high altitudes. In 1955, the United States and the Soviet
Union each committed themselves to launching an Earth-orbiting satellite during IGY, a competition that
began what came to be known as the space race. The IGY (stretched to 18 months) took place between July
1957 and December 1958.
The Soviet Union won the first lap of the race by launching Sputnik 1 in October 1957. The US government
spurred its scientists and engineers to even greater efforts to get something into space to maintain the
country’s prestige. However, the primary US satellite program, Vanguard, ran into difficulties: each of its
early launches crashed or exploded. Simultaneously, a second team of rocket engineers and scientists had
quietly been working on a military launch vehicle called Jupiter-C. Van Allen spearheaded the design of the
instruments aboard a small satellite that this vehicle would carry. On January 31, 1958, Van Allen’s Explorer
1 became the first US satellite in space.
Unlike Sputnik, Explorer 1 was equipped to make scientific measurements of high-energy charged particles
above the atmosphere. Van Allen and his team discovered a belt of highly charged particles surrounding
Earth, and these belts now bear his name. This first scientific discovery of the space program made Van
Allen’s name known around the world.
Van Allen and his colleagues continued to measure the magnetic and particle environment around planets
VOYAGERS IN ASTRONOMY
11 • The Giant Planets
with increasingly sophisticated spacecraft, including Pioneers 10 and 11, which made exploratory surveys of
the environments of Jupiter and Saturn. Some scientists refer to the charged-particle zones around those
planets as Van Allen belts as well. (Once, when Van Allen was giving a lecture at the University of Arizona,
the graduate students in planetary science asked him if he would leave his belt at the school. It is now
proudly displayed as the university’s “Van Allen belt.”)
Van Allen was a strong supporter of space science and an eloquent senior spokesperson for the American
scientific community, warning NASA not to put all its efforts into human spaceflight, but to also use robotic
spacecraft as productive tools for space exploration.
Clouds and Atmospheric Structure
The clouds of Jupiter (Figure 11.10) are among the most spectacular sights in the solar system, much beloved
by makers of science-fiction films. They range in color from white to orange to red to brown, swirling and
twisting in a constantly changing kaleidoscope of patterns. Saturn shows similar but much more subdued
cloud activity; instead of vivid colors, its clouds have a nearly uniform butterscotch hue (Figure 11.11).
Figure 11.10 Jupiter’s Colorful Clouds. The vibrant colors of the clouds on Jupiter present a puzzle to astronomers: given the cool
temperatures and the composition of nearly 90% hydrogen, the atmosphere should be colorless. One hypothesis suggests that
perhaps colorful hydrogen compounds rise from warm areas. The actual colors are a bit more muted, as shown in Figure 11.2.
(credit: modification of work by Voyager Project, JPL, and NASA)
Different gases freeze at different temperatures. At the temperatures and pressures of the upper atmospheres
of Jupiter and Saturn, methane remains a gas, but ammonia can condense and freeze. (Similarly, water vapor
condenses high in Earth’s atmosphere to produce clouds of ice crystals.) The primary clouds that we see
around these planets, whether from a spacecraft or through a telescope, are composed of frozen ammonia
crystals. The ammonia clouds mark the upper edge of the planets’ tropospheres; above that is the
stratosphere, the coldest part of the atmosphere. (These layers were initially defined in Earth as a Planet.)
11.3 • Atmospheres of the Giant Planets
Figure 11.11 Saturn over Five Years. These beautiful images of Saturn were recorded by the Hubble Space Telescope between 1996
and 2000. Since Saturn is tilted by 27°, we see the orientation of Saturn’s rings around its equator change as the planet moves along
its orbit. Note the horizontal bands in the atmosphere. (credit: modification of work by NASA and The Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/
AURA))
The diagrams in Figure 11.12 show the structure and clouds in the atmospheres of all four jovian planets. On
both Jupiter and Saturn, the temperature near the cloud tops is about 140 K (only a little cooler than the polar
caps of Mars). On Jupiter, this cloud level is at a pressure of about 0.1 bar (one tenth the atmospheric pressure
at the surface of Earth), but on Saturn it occurs lower in the atmosphere, at about 1 bar. Because the ammonia
clouds lie so much deeper on Saturn, they are more difficult to see, and the overall appearance of the planet is
much blander than is Jupiter’s appearance.
Figure 11.12 Atmospheric Structure of the Jovian Planets. In each diagram, the yellow line shows how the temperature (see the
scale on the bottom) changes with altitude (see the scale at the left). The location of the main layers on each planet is also shown.
Within the tropospheres of these planets, the temperature and pressure both increase with depth. Through
breaks in the ammonia clouds, we can see tantalizing glimpses of other cloud layers that can form in these
deeper regions of the atmosphere—regions that were sampled directly for Jupiter by the Galileo probe that fell
into the planet.
As it descended to a pressure of 5 bars, the probe should have passed into a region of frozen water clouds,
then below that into clouds of liquid water droplets, perhaps similar to the common clouds of the terrestrial
troposphere. At least this is what scientists expected. But the probe saw no water clouds, and it measured a
surprisingly low abundance of water vapor in the atmosphere. It soon became clear to the Galileo scientists
that the probe happened to descend through an unusually dry, cloud-free region of the atmosphere—a giant
11 • The Giant Planets
downdraft of cool, dry gas. Andrew Ingersoll of Caltech, a member of the Galileo team, called this entry site the
“desert” of Jupiter. It’s a pity that the probe did not enter a more representative region, but that’s the luck of
the cosmic draw. The probe continued to make measurements to a pressure of 22 bars but found no other
cloud layers before its instruments stopped working. It also detected lightning storms, but only at great
distances, further suggesting that the probe itself was in a region of clear weather.
Above the visible ammonia clouds in Jupiter’s atmosphere, we find the clear stratosphere, which reaches a
minimum temperature near 120 K. At still higher altitudes, temperatures rise again, just as they do in the
upper atmosphere of Earth, because here the molecules absorb ultraviolet light from the Sun. The cloud colors
are due to impurities, the product of chemical reactions among the atmospheric gases in a process we call
photochemistry. In Jupiter’s upper atmosphere, photochemical reactions create a variety of fairly complex
compounds of hydrogen and carbon that form a thin layer of smog far above the visible clouds. We show this
smog as a fuzzy orange region in Figure 11.12; however, this thin layer does not block our view of the clouds
beneath it.
The visible atmosphere of Saturn is composed of approximately 75% hydrogen and 25% helium, with trace
amounts of methane, ethane, propane, and other hydrocarbons. The overall structure is similar to that of
Jupiter. Temperatures are somewhat colder, however, and the atmosphere is more extended due to Saturn’s
lower surface gravity. Thus, the layers are stretched out over a longer distance, as you can see in Figure 11.12.
Overall, though, the same atmospheric regions, condensation cloud, and photochemical reactions that we see
on Jupiter should be present on Saturn (Figure 11.13).
Figure 11.13 Cloud Structure on Saturn. In this Cassini image, colors have been intensified, so we can see the bands and zones and
storms in the atmosphere. The dark band is the shadow of the rings on the planet. (credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/Space Science Institute)
Saturn has one anomalous cloud structure that has mystified scientists: a hexagonal wave pattern around the
north pole, shown in Figure 11.14. The six sides of the hexagon are each longer than the diameter of Earth.
Winds are also extremely high on Saturn, with speeds of up to 1800 kilometers per hour measured near the
equator.
11.3 • Atmospheres of the Giant Planets
Figure 11.14 Hexagon Pattern on Saturn’s North Pole. In this infrared nighttime image from the Cassini mission, the path of
Saturn’s hexagonal jet stream is visible as the planet’s north pole emerges from the darkness of winter. (credit: NASA/JPL/University
of Arizona)
See images of Saturn’s hexagon (https://openstax.org/l/30Hexagon) with exaggerated color in this brief
NASA video.
Unlike Jupiter and Saturn, Uranus is almost entirely featureless as seen at wavelengths that range from the
ultraviolet to the infrared (see its rather boring image in Figure 11.1). Calculations indicate that the basic
atmospheric structure of Uranus should resemble that of Jupiter and Saturn, although its upper clouds (at the
1-bar pressure level) are composed of methane rather than ammonia. However, the absence of an internal
heat source suppresses up-and-down movement and leads to a very stable atmosphere with little visible
structure.
Neptune differs from Uranus in its appearance, although their basic atmospheric temperatures are similar.
The upper clouds are composed of methane, which forms a thin cloud layer near the top of the troposphere at
a temperature of 70 K and a pressure of 1.5 bars. Most the atmosphere above this level is clear and
transparent, with less haze than is found on Uranus. The scattering of sunlight by gas molecules lends
Neptune a pale blue color similar to that of Earth’s atmosphere (Figure 11.15). Another cloud layer, perhaps
composed of hydrogen sulfide ice particles, exists below the methane clouds at a pressure of 3 bars.
LINK TO LEARNING
11 • The Giant Planets
Figure 11.15 Neptune. The planet Neptune is seen here as photographed by Voyager in 1989. The blue color, exaggerated with
computer processing, is caused by the scattering of sunlight in the planet’s upper atmosphere. (credit: modification of work by
NASA)
Unlike Uranus, Neptune has an atmosphere in which convection currents—vertical drafts of gas—emanate
from the interior, powered by the planet’s internal heat source. These currents carry warm gas above the
1.5-bar cloud level, forming additional clouds at elevations about 75 kilometers higher. These high-altitude
clouds form bright white patterns against the blue planet beneath. Voyager photographed distinct shadows
on the methane cloud tops, permitting the altitudes of the high clouds to be calculated. Figure 11.16 is a
remarkable close-up of Neptune’s outer layers that could never have been obtained from Earth.
Figure 11.16 High Clouds in the Atmosphere of Neptune. These bright, narrow cirrus clouds are made of methane ice crystals.
From the shadows they cast on the thicker cloud layer below, we can measure that they are about 75 kilometers higher than the
main clouds. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL)
Winds and Weather
The atmospheres of the jovian planets have many regions of high pressure (where there is more air) and low
pressure (where there is less). Just as it does on Earth, air flows between these regions, setting up wind
patterns that are then distorted by the rotation of the planet. By observing the changing cloud patterns on the
jovian planets, we can measure wind speeds and track the circulation of their atmospheres.
11.3 • Atmospheres of the Giant Planets
The atmospheric motions we see on these planets are fundamentally different from those on the terrestrial
planets. The giants spin faster, and their rapid rotation tends to smear out of the circulation into horizontal
(east-west) patterns parallel to the equator. In addition, there is no solid surface below the atmosphere
against which the circulation patterns can rub and lose energy (which is how tropical storms on Earth
ultimately die out when they come over land).
As we have seen, on all the giants except Uranus, heat from the inside contributes about as much energy to
the atmosphere as sunlight from the outside. This means that deep convection currents of rising hot air and
falling cooler air circulate throughout the atmospheres of the planets in the vertical direction.
The main features of Jupiter’s visible clouds (see Figure 11.2 and Figure 11.10, for example) are alternating
dark and light bands that stretch around the planet parallel to the equator. These bands are semi-permanent
features, although they shift in intensity and position from year to year. Consistent with the small tilt of
Jupiter’s axis, the pattern does not change with the seasons.
More fundamental than these bands are underlying east-west wind patterns in the atmosphere, which do not
appear to change at all, even over many decades. These are illustrated in Figure 11.17, which indicates how
strong the winds are at each latitude for the giant planets. At Jupiter’s equator, a jet stream flows eastward
with a speed of about 90 meters per second (300 kilometers per hour), similar to the speed of jet streams in
Earth’s upper atmosphere. At higher latitudes there are alternating east- and west-moving streams, with each
hemisphere an almost perfect mirror image of the other. Saturn shows a similar pattern, but with a much
stronger equatorial jet stream, as we noted earlier.
Figure 11.17 Winds on the Giant Planets. This image compares the winds of the giant planets, illustrating that wind speed (shown
on the horizontal axis) and wind direction vary with latitude (shown on the vertical axis). Winds are measured relative to a planet’s
internal rotation speed. A positive velocity means that the winds are blowing in the same direction as, but faster than, the planet’s
internal rotation. A negative velocity means that the winds are blowing more slowly than the planet’s internal rotation.
The light zones on Jupiter are regions of upwelling air capped by white ammonia cirrus clouds. They
apparently represent the tops of upward-moving convection currents.2 The darker belts are regions where the
cooler atmosphere moves downward, completing the convection cycle; they are darker because fewer
ammonia clouds mean we can see deeper into the atmosphere, perhaps down to a region of ammonium
hydrosulfide (NH4SH) clouds. The Galileo probe sampled one of the clearest of these dry downdrafts.
In spite of the strange seasons induced by the 98° tilt of its axis, Uranus’ basic circulation is parallel with its
equator, as is the case on Jupiter and Saturn. The mass of the atmosphere and its capacity to store heat are so
great that the alternating 42-year periods of sunlight and darkness have little effect. In fact, Voyager
measurements show that the atmospheric temperature is even a few degrees higher on the dark winter side
than on the hemisphere facing the Sun. This is another indication that the behavior of such giant planet
atmospheres is a complex problem that we do not fully understand.
Recall from earlier chapters that convection is a process in which liquids, heated from underneath, have regions where hot
material rises and cooler material descends. You can see convection at work if you heat oatmeal on a stovetop or watch miso soup
boil.
11 • The Giant Planets
Neptune’s weather is characterized by strong east-west winds generally similar to those observed on Jupiter
and Saturn. The highest wind speeds near its equator reach 2100 kilometers per hour, even higher than the
peak winds on Saturn. The Neptune equatorial jet stream actually approaches supersonic speeds (faster than
the speed of sound in Neptune’s air).
Giant Storms on Giant Planets
Superimposed on the regular atmospheric circulation patterns we have just described are many local
disturbances—weather systems or storms, to borrow the term we use on Earth. The most prominent of these
are large, oval-shaped, high-pressure regions on both Jupiter (Figure 11.18) and Neptune.
Figure 11.18 Storms on Jupiter. Two examples of storms on Jupiter illustrate the use of enhanced color and contrast to bring out
faint features. (a) The three oval-shaped white storms below and to the left of Jupiter’s Great Red Spot are highly active, and moved
closer together over the course of seven months between 1994 and 1995. (b) The clouds of Jupiter are turbulent and ever-changing,
as shown in this Hubble Space Telescope image from 2007. (credit a: modification of work by Reta Beebe, Amy Simon (New Mexico
State Univ.), and NASA; credit b: modification of work by NASA, ESA, and A. Simon-Miller (NASA Goddard Space Flight Center))
The largest and most famous of Jupiter’s storms is the Great Red Spot, a reddish oval in the southern
hemisphere that changes slowly; it was 25,000 kilometers long when Voyager arrived in 1979, but it had shrunk
to 20,000 kilometers by the end of the Galileo mission in 2000 (Figure 11.19). The giant storm has persisted in
Jupiter’s atmosphere ever since astronomers were first able to observe it after the invention of the telescope,
more than 300 years ago. However, it has continued to shrink and has become more nearly circular, raising
speculation that we may see its end within a few decades. Measurements from the Juno spacecraft of
variations in Jupiter’s gravity field indicate that the depth of the Red Spot storm system is only a few hundred
kilometers—a finding that challenges some of the models astronomers have made of this long-lasting
weather system.
Figure 11.19 Jupiter’s Great Red Spot. This is the largest storm system on Jupiter, as seen during the Voyager spacecraft flyby.
Below and to the right of the Red Spot is one of the white ovals, which are similar but smaller high-pressure features. The white oval
11.3 • Atmospheres of the Giant Planets
is roughly the size of planet Earth, to give you a sense of the huge scale of the weather patterns we are seeing. The colors on the
Jupiter image have been somewhat exaggerated here so astronomers (and astronomy students) can study their differences more
effectively. See Figure 11.2 to get a better sense of the colors your eye would actually see near Jupiter. (credit: NASA/JPL)
In addition to its longevity, the Red Spot differs from terrestrial storms in being a high-pressure region; on our
planet, such storms are regions of lower pressure. The Red Spot’s counterclockwise rotation has a period of six
days. Three similar but smaller disturbances (about as big as Earth) formed on Jupiter in the 1930s. They look
like white ovals, and one can be seen clearly below and to the right of the Great Red Spot in Figure 11.19. In
1998, the Galileo spacecraft watched as two of these ovals collided and merged into one.
We don’t know what causes the Great Red Spot or the white ovals, but we do have an idea how they can last so
long once they form. On Earth, the lifetime of a large oceanic hurricane or typhoon is typically a few weeks, or
even less when it moves over the continents and encounters friction with the land. Jupiter has no solid surface
to slow down an atmospheric disturbance; furthermore, the sheer size of the disturbances lends them
stability. We can calculate that on a planet with no solid surface, the lifetime of anything as large as the Red
Spot should be measured in centuries, while lifetimes for the white ovals should be measured in decades,
which is pretty much what we have observed.
Despite Neptune’s smaller size and different cloud composition, Voyager showed that it had an atmospheric
feature surprisingly similar to Jupiter’s Great Red Spot. Neptune’s Great Dark Spot was nearly 10,000
kilometers long (Figure 11.15). On both planets, the giant storms formed at latitude 20° S, had the same shape,
and took up about the same fraction of the planet’s diameter. The Great Dark Spot rotated with a period of 17
days, versus about 6 days for the Great Red Spot. When the Hubble Space Telescope examined Neptune in the
mid-1990s, however, astronomers could find no trace of the Great Dark Spot on their images.
Although many of the details of the weather on the jovian planets are not yet understood, it is clear that if you
are a fan of dramatic weather, these worlds are the place to look. We study the features in these atmospheres
not only for what they have to teach us about conditions in the jovian planets, but also because we hope they
can help us understand the weather on Earth just a bit better.
E X A M P L E 1 1 . 1
Storms and Winds
The wind speeds in circular storm systems can be formidable on both Earth and the giant planets. Think
about our big terrestrial hurricanes. If you watch their behavior in satellite images shown on weather
outlets, you will see that they require about one day to rotate. If a storm has a diameter of 400 km and
rotates once in 24 h, what is the wind speed?
Solution
Speed equals distance divided by time. The distance in this case is the circumference (2πR or πd), or
approximately 1250 km, and the time is 24 h, so the speed at the edge of the storm would be about 52 km/
h. Toward the center of the storm, the wind speeds can be much higher.
Check Your Learning
Jupiter’s Great Red Spot rotates in 6 d and has a circumference equivalent to a circle with radius 10,000 km.
Calculate the wind speed at the outer edge of the spot.
Answer:
For the Great Red Spot of Jupiter, the circumference (2πR) is about 63,000 km. Six d equals 144 h,
suggesting a speed of about 436 km/h. This is much faster than wind speeds on Earth.
11 • The Giant Planets
Key Terms
photochemistry
chemical changes caused by electromagnetic radiation
synchrotron radiation
the radiation emitted by charged particles being accelerated in magnetic fields and
moving at speeds near that of light
Summary
11.1 Exploring the Outer Planets
The outer solar system contains the four giant planets: Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. The gas giants
Jupiter and Saturn have overall compositions similar to that of the Sun. These planets have been explored by
the Pioneer, Voyager, Galileo, and Cassini spacecraft. Voyager 2, perhaps the most successful of all spacescience missions, explored Jupiter (1979), Saturn (1981), Uranus (1986), and Neptune (1989)—a grand tour of
the giant planets—and these flybys have been the only explorations to date of the ice giants Uranus and
Neptune. The Galileo and Cassini missions were long-lived orbiters, and each also deployed an entry probe,
one into Jupiter and one into Saturn’s moon Titan.
11.2 The Giant Planets
Jupiter is 318 times more massive than Earth. Saturn is about 25% as massive as Jupiter, and Uranus and
Neptune are only 5% as massive. All four have deep atmospheres and opaque clouds, and all rotate quickly
with periods from 10 to 17 hours. Jupiter and Saturn have extensive mantles of liquid hydrogen. Uranus and
Neptune are depleted in hydrogen and helium relative to Jupiter and Saturn (and the Sun). Each giant planet
has a core of “ice” and “rock” of about 10 Earth masses. Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune have major internal heat
sources, obtaining as much (or more) energy from their interiors as by radiation from the Sun. Uranus has no
measurable internal heat. Jupiter has the strongest magnetic field and largest magnetosphere of any planet,
first discovered by radio astronomers from observations of synchrotron radiation.
11.3 Atmospheres of the Giant Planets
The four giant planets have generally similar atmospheres, composed mostly of hydrogen and helium. Their
atmospheres contain small quantities of methane and ammonia gas, both of which also condense to form
clouds. Deeper (invisible) cloud layers consist of water and possibly ammonium hydrosulfide (Jupiter and
Saturn) and hydrogen sulfide (Neptune). In the upper atmospheres, hydrocarbons and other trace compounds
are produced by photochemistry. We do not know exactly what causes the colors in the clouds of Jupiter.
Atmospheric motions on the giant planets are dominated by east-west circulation. Jupiter displays the most
active cloud patterns, with Neptune second. Saturn is generally bland, in spite of its extremely high wind
speeds, and Uranus is featureless (perhaps due to its lack of an internal heat source). Large storms (ovalshaped high-pressure systems such as the Great Red Spot on Jupiter and the Great Dark Spot on Neptune) can
be found in some of the planet atmospheres.
For Further Exploration
Articles
Jupiter
Aguirre, Edwin. “Hubble Zooms in on Jupiter’s New Red Spot.” Sky & Telescope (August 2006): 26.
Beatty, J. “Into the Giant.” Sky & Telescope (April 1996): 20. On the Galileo probe.
Beebe, R. “Queen of the Giant Storms.” Sky & Telescope (October 1990): 359. Excellent review of the Red Spot.
Johnson, T. “The Galileo Mission to Jupiter and Its Moons.” Scientific American (February 2000): 40. Results
about Jupiter, Io, Ganymede, and Callisto.
11 • Key Terms
Simon, A. “The Not-So-Great Red Spot.” Sky & Telescope (March 2016): 18. On how the huge storm on Jupiter is
evolving with time.
Smith, B. “Voyage of the Century.” National Geographic (August 1990): 48. Beautiful summary of the Voyager
mission to all four outer planets.
Stern, S. “Jupiter Up Close and Personal.” Astronomy (August 2007): 28. On the New Horizons mission flyby in
February 2007.
Saturn
Gore, R. “The Riddle of the Rings.” National Geographic (July 1981): 3. Colorful report on the Voyager mission.
McEwen, A. “Cassini Unveils Saturn.” Astronomy (July 2006): 30. A report on the first two years of discoveries in
the Saturn system.
Spilker, L. “Saturn Revolution.” Astronomy (October 2008): 34. On results from the Cassini mission.
Talcott, R. “Saturn’s Sweet Surprises.” Astronomy (June 2007): 52. On Cassini mission results.
Uranus and Neptune
Cowling, T. “Big Blue: The Twin Worlds of Uranus and Neptune.” Astronomy (October 1990): 42. Nice, long
review of the two planets.
Gore, R. “Neptune: Voyager’s Last Picture Show.” National Geographic (August 1990): 35.
Lunine, J. “Neptune at 150.” Sky & Telescope (September 1996): 38. Nice review.
Websites
Jupiter
NASA Solar System Exploration: http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/planets/jupiter (http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/
planets/jupiter)
Nine Planets Site: http://nineplanets.org/jupiter.html (http://nineplanets.org/jupiter.html)
Planetary Sciences Site: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/jupiterpage.html
(http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/jupiterpage.html)
Saturn
NASA Solar System Exploration: http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/planets/saturn (http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/
planets/saturn)
Nine Planets Site: http://nineplanets.org/saturn.html (http://nineplanets.org/saturn.html)
Planetary Sciences Site: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/saturnpage.html
(http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/saturnpage.html)
Uranus
NASA Solar System Exploration: http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/planets/uranus (http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/
planets/uranus)
Nine Planets Site: http://nineplanets.org/uranus.html (http://nineplanets.org/uranus.html)
Planetary Sciences Site: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/uranuspage.html
(http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/uranuspage.html)
Neptune
NASA Solar System Exploration: http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/planets/neptune (http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/
11 • For Further Exploration
planets/neptune)
Nine Planets Site: http://nineplanets.org/neptune.html (http://nineplanets.org/neptune.html)
Planetary Sciences Site: http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/neptunepage.html
(http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/planets/neptunepage.html)
Missions
Cassini Mission Site at the Jet Propulsion Lab: http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/index.cfm (http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/
index.cfm)
Cassini-Huygens Mission Site at European Space Agency: http://sci.esa.int/cassini-huygens/ (http://sci.esa.int/
cassini-huygens/)
NASA Galileo Mission Site: http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo/ (http://Solarsystem.nasa.gov/galileo/)
NASA’s Juno Mission to Jupiter: http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/juno/main/index.html
(http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/juno/main/index.html)
Voyager Mission Site at the Jet Propulsion Lab: http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/ (http://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/)
Videos
Cassini: 15 Years of Exploration: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2z8fzz_MBAw
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2z8fzz_MBAw). Quick visual summary of mission highlights (2:29).
In the Land of Enchantment: The Epic Story of the Cassini Mission to Saturn: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Vx135n8VFxY (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vx135n8VFxY). An inspiring illustrated lecture by
Cassini Mission Imagining Lead Scientist Carolyn Porco (1:37:52).
Jupiter: The Largest Planet: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MNt79d7deoA (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=MNt79d7deoA). Produced by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center and Science on a Sphere (7:29).
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
A new member of Congress has asked your group to investigate why the Galileo probe launched into the
Jupiter atmosphere in 1995 survived only 57 minutes and whether this was an example of a terrible
scandal. Make a list of all the reasons the probe did not last longer, and why it was not made more
durable. (Remember that the probe had to hitch a ride to Jupiter!)
B.
Select one of the jovian planets and organize your group to write a script for an evening news weather
report for the planet you chose. Be sure you specify roughly how high in the atmosphere the region lies
for which you are giving the report.
C.
What does your group think should be the next step to learn more about the giant planets? Put cost
considerations aside for a moment: What kind of mission would you recommend to NASA to learn more
about these giant worlds? Which world or worlds should get the highest priority and why?
D.
Suppose that an extremely dedicated (and slightly crazy) astronomer volunteers to become a human
probe into Jupiter (and somehow manages to survive the trip through Jupiter’s magnetosphere alive). As
she enters the upper atmosphere of Jupiter, would she fall faster or slower than she would fall doing the
same suicidal jump into the atmosphere of solid Earth? Groups that have some algebra background could
even calculate the force she would feel compared to the force on Earth. (Bonus question: If she were in a
capsule, falling into Jupiter feet first, and the floor of the capsule had a scale, what would the scale show
as her weight compared to her weight on Earth?)
E.
Would you or anyone in your group volunteer for a one-way, life-long mission to a space station orbiting
11 • Collaborative Group Activities
any of the gas giants without ever being able to return to Earth? What are the challenges of such a
mission? Should we leave all exploration of the outer solar system to unmanned space probes?
Exercises
Review Questions
1. What are the main challenges involved in sending probes to the giant planets?
2. Why is it difficult to drop a probe like Galileo? How did engineers solve this problem?
3. Explain why visual observation of the gas giants is not sufficient to determine their rotation periods, and
what evidence was used to deduce the correct periods.
4. What are the seasons like on Jupiter?
5. What is the consequence of Uranus’ spin axis being 98° away from perpendicular to its orbital plane?
6. Describe the seasons on the planet Uranus.
7. At the pressures in Jupiter’s interior, describe the physical state of the hydrogen found there.
8. Which of the gas giants has the largest icy/rocky core compared to its overall size?
9. In the context of the giant planets and the conditions in their interiors, what is meant by “rock” and “ice”?
10. What is the primary source of Jupiter’s internal heat?
11. Describe the interior heat source of Saturn.
12. Which planet has the strongest magnetic field, and hence the largest magnetosphere? What is its source?
13. What are the visible clouds on the four giant planets composed of, and why are they different from each
other?
14. Compare the atmospheric circulation (weather) of the four giant planets.
15. What are the main atmospheric heat sources of each of the giant planets?
16. Why do the upper levels of Neptune’s atmosphere appear blue?
17. How do storms on Jupiter differ from storm systems on Earth?
Thought Questions
18. Describe the differences in the chemical makeup of the inner and outer parts of the solar system. What is
the relationship between what the planets are made of and the temperature where they formed?
19. How did the giant planets grow to be so large?
20. Jupiter is denser than water, yet composed for the most part of two light gases, hydrogen and helium.
What makes Jupiter as dense as it is?
21. Would you expect to find free oxygen gas in the atmospheres of the giant planets? Why or why not?
22. Why would a tourist brochure (of the future) describing the most dramatic natural sights of the giant
planets have to be revised more often than one for the terrestrial planets?
23. The water clouds believed to be present on Jupiter and Saturn exist at temperatures and pressures similar
to those in the clouds of the terrestrial atmosphere. What would it be like to visit such a location on Jupiter
or Saturn? In what ways would the environment differ from that in the clouds of Earth?
11 • Exercises
24. Describe the different processes that lead to substantial internal heat sources for Jupiter and Saturn. Since
these two objects generate much of their energy internally, should they be called stars instead of planets?
Justify your answer.
25. Research the Galileo mission. What technical problems occurred between the mission launch and the
arrival of the craft in Jupiter’s system, and how did the mission engineers deal with them? (Good sources
of information include Astronomy and Sky & Telescope articles, plus the mission website.)
Figuring for Yourself
26. How many times more pressure exists in the interior of Jupiter compared to that of Earth?
27. Calculate the wind speed at the edge of Neptune’s Great Dark Spot, which was 10,000 km in diameter and
rotated in 17 d.
28. Calculate how many Earths would fit into the volumes of Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
29. As the Voyager spacecraft penetrated into the outer solar system, the illumination from the Sun declined.
Relative to the situation at Earth, how bright is the sunlight at each of the jovian planets?
30. The ions in the inner parts of Jupiter’s magnetosphere rotate with the same period as Jupiter. Calculate
how fast they are moving at the orbit of Jupiter’s moon Io (see Appendix G). Will these ions strike Io from
behind or in front as it moves about Jupiter?
11 • Exercises
11 • Exercises
