Figure 13.1 Hale-Bopp. Comet Hale-Bopp was one of the most attractive and easily visible comets of the twentieth century. It is
shown here as it appeared in the sky in March 1997. You can see the comet’s long blue ion tail and the shorter white dust tail. You
will learn about these two types of comet tails, and how they form, in this chapter. (credit: modification of work by ESO/E. Slawik)
Chapter Outline
13.1 Asteroids
13.2 Asteroids and Planetary Defense
13.3 The “Long-Haired” Comets
13.4 The Origin and Fate of Comets and Related Objects
Thinking Ahead
Hundreds of smaller members of the solar system—asteroids and comets—are known to have crossed Earth’s
orbit in the past, and many others will do so in centuries ahead. What could we do if we knew a few years in
advance that one of these bodies would hit Earth?
To understand the early history of life on Earth, scientists study ancient fossils. To reconstruct the early history
of the solar system, we need cosmic fossils—materials that formed when our system was very young.
However, reconstructing the early history of the solar system by looking just at the planets is almost as difficult
as determining the circumstances of human birth by merely looking at an adult.
Instead, we turn to the surviving remnants of the creation process—ancient but smaller objects in our cosmic
neighborhood. Asteroids are rocky or metallic and contain little volatile (easily evaporated) material. Comets
are small icy objects that contain frozen water and other volatile materials but with solid grains mixed in. In
the deep freeze beyond Neptune, we also have a large reservoir of material unchanged since the formation of
the solar system, as well as a number of dwarf planets.
Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
13 • Thinking Ahead
13.1
Asteroids
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Outline the story of the discovery of asteroids and describe their typical orbits
Describe the composition and classification of the various types of asteroids
Discuss what was learned from spacecraft missions to several asteroids
The asteroids are mostly found in the broad space between Mars and Jupiter, a region of the solar system
called the asteroid belt. Asteroids are too small to be seen without a telescope; the first of them was not
discovered until the beginning of the nineteenth century.
Discovery and Orbits of the Asteroids
In the late 1700s, many astronomers were hunting for an additional planet they thought should exist in the
gap between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. The Sicilian astronomer Giovanni Piazzi thought he had found this
missing planet in 1801, when he discovered the first asteroid (or as it was later called, “minor planet”) orbiting
at 2.8 AU from the Sun. His discovery, which he named Ceres, was quickly followed by the detection of three
other little planets in similar orbits.
Clearly, there was not a single missing planet between Mars and Jupiter but rather a whole group of objects,
each much smaller than our Moon. (An analogous discovery history has played out in slow motion in the outer
solar system. Pluto was discovered beyond Neptune in 1930 and was initially called a planet, but early in the
twenty-first century, several other similar objects were found. We now call all of them dwarf planets.)
By 1890, more than 300 of these minor planets or asteroids had been discovered by sharp-eyed observers. In
that year, Max Wolf at Heidelberg introduced astronomical photography to the search for asteroids, greatly
accelerating the discovery of these dim objects. In the twenty-first century, searchers use computer-driven
electronic cameras, another leap in technology. Currently many asteroid searches are made with cameras in
space. More than a million asteroids now have well-determined orbits.
Asteroids are given a number (corresponding to the order of discovery) and sometimes also a name.
Originally, the names of asteroids were chosen from goddesses in Greek and Roman mythology. After
exhausting these and other female names (including, later, those of spouses, friends, flowers, cities, and
others), astronomers turned to the names of colleagues (and other people of distinction) whom they wished
to honor. For example, asteroids 2410, 4859, and 68448 are named Morrison, Fraknoi, and Sidneywolff, for the
three senior authors of this textbook.
The largest asteroid is Ceres (numbered 1), with a diameter just less than 1000 kilometers. As we saw, Ceres
was considered a planet when it was discovered but later was called an asteroid (the first of many.) Now, it has
again been reclassified and is considered one of the dwarf planets, like Pluto (see the chapter on Moons, Rings
and Pluto). We still find it convenient, however, to discuss Ceres as the largest of the asteroids. Two other
asteroids, Pallas and Vesta, have diameters of about 500 kilometers, and about 15 more are larger than 250
kilometers (see Table 13.1). The number of asteroids increases rapidly with decreasing size; there are about
100 times more objects 10 kilometers across than there are 100 kilometers across.
The Minor Planet Center (https://openstax.org/l/30minplancen) is a worldwide repository of data on
asteroids. Visit it online to find out about the latest discoveries related to the small bodies in our solar
system. (Note that some of the material on this site is technical; it’s best to click on the menu tab for the
LINK TO LEARNING
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
“public” for information more at the level of this textbook.) Watch this video about asteroid size
comparison (https://openstax.org/l/30astsizecomp) for a dramatic visualization of the sizes of some betterknown asteroids.
The Largest Asteroids
#
Name
Year of
Discovery
Orbit’s Semimajor Axis
(AU)
Diameter
(km)
Compositional
Class
Ceres
2.77
C (carbonaceous)
Pallas
2.77
C (carbonaceous)
Juno
2.67
S (stony)
Vesta
2.36
basaltic
Hygiea
3.14
C (carbonaceous)
Psyche
2.92
M (metallic)
Euphrosyne
3.15
C (carbonaceous)
Europa
3.10
C (carbonaceous)
Cybele
3.43
C (carbonaceous)
Sylvia
3.48
C (carbonaceous)
Patientia
3.06
C (carbonaceous)
Davida
3.16
C (carbonaceous)
Interamnia
3.06
C (carbonaceous)
Table 13.1
The asteroids all revolve about the Sun in the same direction as the planets, and most of their orbits lie near
the plane in which Earth and other planets circle. The majority of asteroids are in the asteroid belt, the region
between Mars and Jupiter that contains all asteroids with orbital periods between 3.3 to 6 years (Figure 13.2).
Although more than 75% of the known asteroids are in the belt, they are not closely spaced (as they are
sometimes depicted in science fiction movies). The volume of the belt is actually very large, and the typical
spacing between objects (down to 1 kilometer in size) is several million kilometers. (This was fortunate for
spacecraft like Galileo, Cassini, Rosetta, and New Horizons, which needed to travel through the asteroid belt
without a collision.)
13.1 • Asteroids
Figure 13.2 Asteroids in the Solar System. This computer-generated diagram shows the positions of the asteroids known in 2006. If
the asteroid sizes were drawn to scale, none of the dots representing an asteroid would be visible. Here, the asteroid dots are too big
and give a false impression of how crowded the asteroid belt would look if you were in it. Note that in addition to those in the
asteroid belt, there are also asteroids in the inner solar system and some along Jupiter’s orbit (such as the Trojans and Greeks
groups), controlled by the giant planet’s gravity.
Still, over the long history of our solar system, there have been a good number of collisions among the
asteroids themselves. In 1918, the Japanese astronomer Kiyotsugu Hirayama found that some asteroids fall
into families, groups with similar orbital characteristics. He hypothesized that each family may have resulted
from the breakup of a larger body or, more likely, from the collision of two asteroids. Slight differences in the
speeds with which the various fragments left the collision scene account for the small spread in orbits now
observed for the different asteroids in a given family. Several dozen such families exist, and observations have
shown that individual members of most families have similar compositions, as we would expect if they were
fragments of a common parent.
You can see a dramatic animated video (https://openstax.org/l/30anividastorb) showing the orbits of
100,000 asteroids found by one sky survey. As the 3-minute video goes on, you get to see the orbits of the
planets and how the asteroids are distributed in the solar system. But note that all such videos are
misleading in one sense. The asteroids themselves are really small compared to the distances covered, so
they have to be depicted as larger points to be visible. If you were in the asteroid belt, there would be far
more empty space than asteroids.
LINK TO LEARNING
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Composition and Classification
Asteroids are as different as black and white. The majority are very dark, with reflectivity of only 3 to 4%, like a
lump of coal. However, another large group has a typical reflectivity of 15%. To understand more about these
differences and how they are related to chemical composition, astronomers study the spectrum of the light
reflected from asteroids for clues about their composition.
The dark asteroids are revealed from spectral studies to be primitive bodies (those that have changed little
chemically since the beginning of the solar system) composed of silicates mixed with dark, organic carbon
compounds. These are known as C-type asteroids (“C” for carbonaceous). Two of the largest asteroids, Ceres
and Pallas, are primitive, as are almost all of the asteroids in the outer part of the belt. In 2020 and 2021, two of
these C-type asteroids, Bennu and Ryugu, were visited by spacecraft that briefly touched their surfaces.
The second most populous group is the S-type asteroids, where “S” stands for a stony or silicate composition.
Here, the dark carbon compounds are missing, resulting in higher reflectivity and clearer spectral signatures
of silicate minerals. The S-type asteroids are also chemically primitive, but their different composition indicates
that they were probably formed in a different location in the solar system from the C-type asteroids.
Asteroids of a third class, much less numerous than those of the first two, are composed primarily of metal
and are called M-type asteroids (“M” for metallic). Spectroscopically, the identification of metal is difficult, but
for at least the largest M-type asteroid, Psyche, this identification has been confirmed by radar. Since a metal
asteroid, like an airplane or ship, is a much better reflector of radar than is a stony object, Psyche appears
bright when we aim a radar beam at it. In 2022, a NASA mission, conveniently named Psyche, will be launched
toward this asteroid.
How did such metal asteroids come to be? We suspect that each came from a parent body large enough for its
molten interior to settle out or differentiate, and the heavier metals sank to the center. When this parent body
shattered in a later collision, the fragments from the core were rich in metals. There is enough metal in even a
1-kilometer M-type asteroid to supply the world with iron and many other industrial metals for the foreseeable
future, if we could bring one safely to Earth.
In addition to the M-type asteroids, a few other asteroids show signs of early heating and differentiation.
These have basaltic surfaces like the volcanic plains of the Moon and Mars; the large asteroid Vesta (discussed
in a moment) is in this last category.
The different classes of asteroids are found at different distances from the Sun (Figure 13.3). By tracing how
asteroid compositions vary with distance from the Sun, we can reconstruct some of the properties of the solar
nebula from which they originally formed.
Figure 13.3 Where Different Types of Asteroids Are Found. Asteroids of different composition are distributed at different
13.1 • Asteroids
distances from the Sun. The S-type and C-type are both primitive; the M-type consists of cores of differentiated parent bodies.
Vesta: A Differentiated Asteroid
Vesta is one of the most interesting of the asteroids. It orbits the Sun with a semi-major axis of 2.4 AU in the
inner part of the asteroid belt. Its relatively high reflectivity of almost 30% makes it the brightest asteroid, so
bright that it is actually visible to the unaided eye if you know just where to look. But its real claim to fame is
that its surface is covered with basalt, indicating that Vesta is a differentiated object that must once have been
volcanically active, in spite of its small size (about 500 kilometers in diameter).
Meteorites from Vesta’s surface (Figure 13.4), identified by comparing their spectra with that of Vesta itself,
have landed on Earth and are available for direct study in the laboratory. We thus know a great deal about this
asteroid. The age of the lava flows from which these meteorites derived has been measured at 4.4 to 4.5 billion
years, very soon after the formation of the solar system. This age is consistent with what we might expect for
volcanoes on Vesta; whatever process heated such a small object was probably intense and short-lived. In
2016, a meteorite fell in Turkey that could be identified with a particular lava flow as revealed by the orbiting
Dawn spacecraft.
Figure 13.4 Piece of Vesta. This meteorite (rock that fell from space) has been identified as a volcanic fragment from the crust of
asteroid Vesta. (credit: modification of work by R. Kempton (New England Meteoritical Services))
Asteroids Up Close
On the way to its 1995 encounter with Jupiter, the Galileo spacecraft was targeted to fly close to two main-belt
S-type asteroids called Gaspra and Ida. The Galileo camera revealed both as long and highly irregular
(resembling a battered potato), as befits fragments from a catastrophic collision (Figure 13.5).
Figure 13.5 Mathilde, Gaspra, and Ida. The first three asteroids photographed from spacecraft flybys, printed to the same scale.
Gaspra and Ida are S-type and were investigated by the Galileo spacecraft; Mathilde is C-type and was a flyby target for the NEAR-
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Shoemaker spacecraft. (credit: modification of work by NEAR Project, Galileo Project, NASA)
The detailed images allowed us to count the craters on Gaspra and Ida, and to estimate the length of time
their surfaces have been exposed to collisions. The Galileo scientists concluded that these asteroids are only
about 200 million years old (that is, the collisions that formed them took place about 200 million years ago).
Calculations suggest that an asteroid the size of Gaspra or Ida can expect another catastrophic collision
sometime in the next billion years, at which time it will be disrupted to form another generation of still-smaller
fragments.
The greatest surprise of the Galileo flyby of Ida was the discovery of a moon (which was then named Dactyl), in
orbit about the asteroid (Figure 13.6). Although only 1.5 kilometers in diameter, smaller than many college
campuses, Dactyl provides scientists with something otherwise beyond their reach—a measurement of the
mass and density of Ida using Kepler’s laws. The moon’s distance of about 100 kilometers and its orbital
period of about 24 hours indicate that Ida has a density of approximately 2.5 g/cm3, which matches the density
of primitive rocks. Subsequently, both large visible-light telescopes and high-powered planetary radar have
discovered many other asteroid moons, so that we are now able to accumulate valuable data on asteroid
masses and densities.
Figure 13.6 Ida and Dactyl. The asteroid Ida and its tiny moon Dactyl (the small body off to its right), were photographed by the
Galileo spacecraft in 1993. Irregularly shaped Ida is 56 kilometers in its longest dimension, while Dactyl is about 1.5 kilometers
across. The colors have been intensified in this image; to the eye, all asteroids look basically gray. (credit: modification of work by
NASA/JPL)
By the way, Phobos and Deimos, the two small moons of Mars, are probably captured asteroids (Figure 13.7).
They were first studied at close range by the Viking orbiters in 1977 and later by Mars Global Surveyor. Both
are irregular, somewhat elongated, and heavily created, resembling other smaller asteroids. Their largest
dimensions are about 26 kilometers and 16 kilometers, respectively. The small outer moons of Jupiter and
Saturn were probably also captured from passing asteroids, perhaps early in the history of the solar system.
13.1 • Asteroids
Figure 13.7 Moons of Mars. The two small moons of Mars, (a) Phobos and (b) Deimos, were discovered in 1877 by American
astronomer Asaph Hall. Their surface materials are similar to many of the asteroids in the outer asteroid belt, leading astronomers
to believe that the two moons may be captured asteroids. (credit a: modification of work by NASA; credit b: modification of work by
NASA/JPL-Caltech/University of Arizona)
Beginning in the 1990s, spacecraft have provided close looks at several more asteroids. The Near Earth
Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft went into orbit around the S-type asteroid Eros, becoming a
temporary moon of this asteroid. On its way to Eros, the NEAR spacecraft was renamed after planetary
geologist Eugene Shoemaker, a pioneer in our understanding of craters and impacts.
For a year, the NEAR-Shoemaker spacecraft orbited the little asteroid at various altitudes, measuring its
surface and interior composition as well as mapping Eros from all sides (Figure 13.8). The data showed that
Eros is made of some of the most chemically primitive materials in the solar system. Several other asteroids
have been revealed as made of loosely bound rubble throughout, but not Eros. Its uniform density (about the
same as that of Earth’s crust) and extensive global-scale grooves and ridges show that it is a cracked but solid
rock.
Figure 13.8 Looking Down on the North Pole of Eros. This view was constructed from six images of the asteroid taken from an
altitude of 200 kilometers. The large crater at the top has been named Psyche (after the maiden who was Eros’ lover in classical
mythology) and is about 5.3 kilometers wide. A saddle-shaped region can be seen directly below it. Craters of many different sizes
are visible. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JHUPL)
Eros has a good deal of loose surface material that appears to have slid down toward lower elevations. In
some places, the surface rubble layer is 100 meters deep. The top of loose soil is dotted with scattered, halfburied boulders. There are so many of these boulders that they are more numerous than the craters. Of
course, with the gravity so low on this small world, a visiting astronaut would find loose boulders rolling
toward her pretty slowly and could easily leap high enough to avoid being hit by one. Although the NEAR-
Shoemaker spacecraft was not constructed as a lander, at the end of its orbital mission in 2000, it was allowed
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
to fall gently to the surface, where it continued its chemical analysis for another week.
In 2003, Japan’s Hayabusa 1 mission not only visited a small asteroid but also brought back samples to study in
laboratories on Earth. The target S-type asteroid, Itokawa (shown in Figure 13.9), is much smaller than Eros,
only about 500 meters long. This asteroid is elongated and appears to be the result of the collision of two
separate asteroids long ago. There are almost no impact craters, but an abundance of boulders (like a pile of
rubble) on the surface.
Figure 13.9 Asteroid Itokawa. The surface of asteroid Itokawa appears to have no craters. Astronomers have hypothesized that its
surface consists of rocks and ice chunks held together by a small amount of gravity, and its interior is probably also a similar rubble
pile. (credit: JAXA)
The Hayabusa spacecraft was designed not to land, but to touch the surface just long enough to collect a small
sample. This tricky maneuver failed on its first try, with the spacecraft briefly toppling over on its side.
Eventually, the controllers were successful in picking up a few grains of surface material and transferring them
into the return capsule (Figure 13.10). We estimate that the dust grains Hayabusa picked up had been exposed
on the surface of the asteroid for about 8 million years.
Figure 13.10 Examining an Asteroid Up Close. (a) Near-Earth Asteroid Bennu, imaged by the Osiris-Rex Spacecraft in 2020. Bennu
is a small (half-km diameter), rapidly spinning dark asteroid. Its low density suggests it is a loosely-bound rubble pile. The surface is
very rough, with protruding rocks and boulders. (b) Preparing to collect a sample, the collection arm is shown just before touchdown on Bennu. For scale, the diameter of the sampling device is 30 cm. The sample of about 100 grams of surface rocks and dust
will be returned to Earth in 2023. a: modification of work by NASA Goddard/University of Arizona; credit b: modification of work by
NASA Goddard/University of Arizona
Following on the success of Hayabusa, both NASA and the Japanese space agency, JAXA, sent more advanced
13.1 • Asteroids
asteroid sample-return missions. Both targeted small Earth-approaching asteroids, only about 1 km in
diameter. Each target is a dark object, apparently a rubble pile formed relatively recently after being broken
apart in a collision. Hayabusa-2 visited the asteroid Ryugu, collected a small sample, and successfully returned
it to Earth in December 2020. The U.S. mission called OSIRIS-REx visited Bennu, an asteroid that actually has a
small chance of colliding with Earth in the next century. Its sample will be returned to Earth in September 2023.
The most ambitious asteroid space mission (called Dawn) has visited the two largest main belt asteroids, Ceres
and Vesta, orbiting each for about a year (Figure 13.11). Their large sizes (diameters of about 1000 and 500
kilometers, respectively) make them appropriate for comparison with the planets and large moons. Both
turned out to be heavily cratered, implying their surfaces are old. On Vesta, we have now actually located the
large impact craters that ejected the basaltic meteorites previously identified as coming from this asteroid.
These craters are so large that they sample several layers of Vesta’s crustal material.
Figure 13.11 Vesta and Ceres. The NASA Dawn spacecraft took these images of the large asteroids (a) Vesta and (b) Ceres. (a) Note
that Vesta is not round, as Ceres (which is considered a dwarf planet) is. A mountain twice the height of Mt. Everest on Earth is visible
at the very bottom of the Vesta image. (b) The image of Ceres has its colors exaggerated to bring out differences in composition. You
can see a white feature in Occator crater near the center of the image. (credit a, b: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech/UCLA/
MPS/DLR/IDA)
Ceres has not had a comparable history of giant impacts, so its surface is covered with craters that look more
like those from the lunar highlands. One big surprise at Ceres is the presence of very bright white spots,
associated primarily with the central peaks of large craters (Figure 13.12). The light-colored mineral is primarily
salt, released from the interior. After repeated close flybys, data from the NASA Dawn spacecraft indicated that
Ceres has (or has had) a subsurface ocean of water, with occasional eruptions on the surface. The most
dramatic is the 4 kilometer tall ice volcano called Ahuna Mons (see Figure 13.12).
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Figure 13.12 White Spots in a Larger Crater on Ceres. White Spots in a Larger Crater on Ceres. (a) These bright features appear to
be salt deposits in a Ceres crater called Occator, which is 92 kilometers across. (b) Ahuna Mons is an isolated mountain on Ceres, 4
kilometers high. It is thought to be an intrusion of ice from the interior. (credit a: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech/UCLA/
MPS/DLR/IDA; credit b: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech/UCLA/MPS/DLR/IDA/PSI)
In late 2017, something entirely new was discovered: an interstellar asteroid. This visitor was found at a
distance of 33 million kilometers with a survey telescope on Haleakala, Hawaii. As astronomers followed up on
the discovery, it quickly became apparent that this asteroid was travelling far too fast to be part of the Sun’s
family. Its orbit is a hyperbola, and when discovered it was already rapidly leaving the inner solar system.
Although it was too distant for imaging by even large telescopes, its size and shape could be estimated from
its brightness and rapid light fluctuations. It is highly elongated, with an approximately cylindrical shape. The
nominal dimensions are about 200 meters in length and only 35 meters across, the most extreme of any
natural object. Large objects, like planets and moons, are pulled by their own gravity into roughly spherical
shapes, and even small asteroids and comets (often described as “potato-shaped”) rarely have irregularities of
more than a factor of two.
This asteroid was named ‘Oumuamua, a Hawaiian word meaning “scout” or “first to reach out.” In a way, the
discovery of an interstellar asteroid or comet was not unexpected. Early in solar system history, before the
planet orbits sorted themselves into stable, non-intersecting paths all in the same plane, we estimate that
quite a lot of mass was ejected, either whole planets or more numerous smaller fragments. Even today, an
occasional comet coming in from the outer edges of the solar system can have its orbit changed by
gravitational interaction with Jupiter and the Sun, and some of these escape on hyperbolic trajectories. In 2019,
astronomers discovered an interstellar comet entering our solar system—more on this in the section on
comets. As we have recently learned that planetary systems are common, the question became: where are
similar debris objects ejected from other planetary systems? Now we have found two, and improved surveys
will soon add others to this category.
View an artist’s rendering of the asteroid ‘Oumuamua (https://www.openstax.org/l/30oumuamua)
(https://www.openstax.org/l/30oumuamua) by the ESO. Although it was not close enough to Earth to be
imaged, its long slender shape was indicated by its rapid variation in brightness as it rotated.
LINK TO LEARNING
13.1 • Asteroids
The space agencies involved with the Dawn mission have produced nice animated “flyover” videos of Vesta
(https://openstax.org/l/30vestaflyover) and Ceres (https://openstax.org/l/30ceresflyover) available online.
13.2
Asteroids and Planetary Defense
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Recognize the threat that near-Earth objects represent for Earth
Discuss possible defensive strategies to protect our planet
Not all asteroids are in the main asteroid belt. In this section, we consider some special groups of asteroids
with orbits that approach or cross the orbit of Earth. These pose the risk of a catastrophic collision with our
planet, such as the collision 65 million years ago that killed the dinosaurs.
Earth-Approaching Asteroids
Asteroids that stray far outside the main belt are of interest mostly to astronomers. But asteroids that come
inward, especially those with orbits that come close to or cross the orbit of Earth, are of interest to political
leaders, military planners—indeed, everyone alive on Earth. Some of these asteroids briefly become the closest
celestial object to us.
In 1994, a 1-kilometer object was picked up passing closer than the Moon, causing a stir of interest in the news
media. Today, it is routine to read of small asteroids coming this close to Earth. (They were always there, but
only in recent years have astronomers been able to detect such faint objects.)
In 2013, a small asteroid hit our planet, streaking across the sky over the Russian city of Chelyabinsk and
exploding with the energy of a nuclear bomb (Figure 13.13). The impactor was a stony object about 20 meters
in diameter, exploding about 30 kilometers high with an energy of 500 kilotons (about 30 times larger than the
nuclear bombs dropped on Japan in World War II). No one was hurt by the blast itself, although it briefly
became as bright as the Sun, drawing many spectators to the windows in their offices and homes. When the
blast wave from the explosion then reached the town, it blew out the windows. About 1500 people had to seek
medical attention from injuries from the shattered glass.
A much larger atmospheric explosion took place in Russia in 1908, caused by an asteroid about 60 meters in
diameter, releasing an energy of 10 megatons, as large the most powerful nuclear weapons of today.
Fortunately, the area directly affected, on the Tunguska River in Siberia, was unpopulated, and no one was
killed. However, the area of forest destroyed by the blast was large equal to the size of a major city (Figure
13.13).
Together with any comets that come close to our planet, such asteroids are known collectively as near-Earth
objects (NEOs). As we will see (and as the dinosaurs found out 65 million years ago,) the collision of a
significant-sized NEO could be a catastrophe for life on our planet.
LINK TO LEARNING
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Figure 13.13 Impacts with Earth. (a) As the Chelyabinsk meteor passed through the atmosphere, it left a trail of smoke and briefly
became as bright as the Sun. (b) Hundreds of kilometers of forest trees were knocked down and burned at the Tunguska impact site.
(credit a: modification of work by Alex Alishevskikh)
Visit the video compilation (https://openstax.org/l/30vidcomchelmet) of the Chelyabinsk meteor streaking
through the sky over the city on February 15, 2013, as taken by people who were in the area when it
occurred.
View this video of a non-technical talk by David Morrison (https://openstax.org/l/30davmorrison) to watch
“The Chelyabinsk Meteor: Can We Survive a Bigger Impact?” Dr. Morrison (SETI Institute and NASA Ames
Research Center) discusses the Chelyabinsk impact and how we learn about NEOs and protect ourselves;
the talk is from the Silicon Valley Astronomy Lectures series.
Astronomers have urged that the first step in protecting Earth from future impacts by NEOs must be to learn
what potential impactors are out there. In 1998, NASA began the Spaceguard Survey, with the goal to discover
and track 90% of Earth-approaching asteroids greater than 1 kilometer in diameter. The size of 1 kilometer was
selected to include all asteroids capable of causing global damage, not merely local or regional effects. At 1
kilometer or larger, the impact could blast so much dust into the atmosphere that the sunlight would be
dimmed for months, causing global crop failures—an event that could threaten the survival of our civilization.
The Spaceguard goal of 90% was reached in 2012 when nearly a thousand of these 1-kilometer near-Earth
asteroids (NEAs) had been found, along with more than 10,000 smaller asteroids. Figure 13.14 shows how the
pace of NEA discoveries has been increasing over recent years. By 2021, astronomers knew of more than
25,000.
LINK TO LEARNING
LINK TO LEARNING
13.2 • Asteroids and Planetary Defense
Figure 13.14 Discovery of Near-Earth Asteroids. The accelerating rate of discovery of NEAs is illustrated in this graph, which shows
the total number of known NEAs, the number over 140 meters in diameter, and the number over 1 kilometer in diameter, the size
that poses the dominant impact risk on Earth.
How did astronomers know when they had discovered 90% of the larger asteroids? There are several ways to
estimate the total number, even before they were individually located. One way is to look at the numbers of
large craters on the dark lunar maria. Remember that these craters were made by impacts just like the ones
we are considering. They are preserved on the Moon’s airless surface, whereas Earth soon erases the imprints
of past impacts. Thus, the number of large craters on the Moon allows us to estimate how often impacts have
occurred on both the Moon and Earth over the past several billion years. The number of impacts is directly
related to the number of asteroids and comets on Earth-crossing orbits.
Another approach is to see how often the surveys (which are automated searches for faint points of light that
move among the stars) rediscover a previously known asteroid. At the beginning of a survey, all the NEAs it
finds will be new. But as the survey becomes more complete, more and more of the moving points the survey
cameras record will be rediscoveries. The more rediscoveries each survey experiences, the more complete our
inventory of these asteroids must be.
We have been relieved to find that none of the NEAs discovered so far is on a trajectory that will impact Earth
within the foreseeable future. However, we can’t speak for the handful of asteroids larger than 1 kilometer
that have not yet been found, or for the much more numerous smaller ones. It is estimated that there are a
million NEAs capable of hitting Earth that are smaller than 1 kilometer but still large enough to destroy a city,
and our surveys have found about 25% of them. Researchers who work with asteroid orbits estimate that for
smaller (and therefore fainter) asteroids we are not yet tracking, we will have about a 5-second warning that
one is going to hit Earth—in other words, we won’t see it until it enters the atmosphere. Clearly, this estimate
gives us a lot of motivation to continue these surveys to track as many asteroids as possible.
Though entirely predictable over times of a few centuries, the orbits of Earth-approaching asteroids are
unstable over long time spans as they are tugged by the gravitational attractions of the planets. These objects
will eventually meet one of two fates: either they will impact one of the terrestrial planets or the Sun, or they
will be ejected gravitationally from the inner solar system due to a near-encounter with a planet. The
probabilities of these two outcomes are about the same. The timescale for impact or ejection is only about a
hundred million years, very short compared with the 4-billion-year age of the solar system. Calculations show
that only approximately one quarter of the current Earth-approaching asteroids will eventually end up
colliding with Earth itself.
If most of the current population of Earth-approaching asteroids will be removed by impact or ejection in a
hundred million years, there must be a continuing source of new objects to replenish our supply of NEAs. Most
of them come from the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, where collisions between asteroids can eject
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
fragments into Earth-crossing orbits (see Figure 13.15). Others may be “dead” comets that have exhausted
their volatile materials (which we’ll discuss in the next section).
Figure 13.15 Near-Earth Asteroid. Toutatis is a 5-kilometer long NEA that approached within 3 million kilometers of Earth in 1992.
This series of images is a reconstruction its size and shape obtained from bouncing radar waves off the asteroid during its close
flyby. Toutatis appears to consist of two irregular, lumpy bodies rotating in contact with each other. (Note that the color has been
artificially added.) (credit: modification of work by NASA)
One reason scientists are interested in the composition and interior structure of NEAs is that humans will
probably need to defend themselves against an asteroid impact someday. If we ever found one of these
asteroids on a collision course with us, we would need to deflect it so it would miss Earth. The most
straightforward way to deflect it would be to crash a spacecraft into it, either slowing it or speeding it up,
slightly changing its orbital period. If this were done several years before the predicted collision, the asteroid
would miss the planet entirely—making an asteroid impact the only natural hazard that we could eliminate
completely by the application of technology. Alternatively, such deflection could be done by exploding a
nuclear bomb near the asteroid to nudge it off course, although the use of nuclear explosives in space raises
other concerns.
To achieve a successful deflection by either technique, we need to know more about the density and interior
structure of the asteroid. A spacecraft impact or a nearby explosion would have a greater effect on a solid
rocky asteroid such as Eros than on a loose rubble pile. Think of climbing a sand dune compared to climbing a
rocky hill with the same slope. On the dune, much of our energy is absorbed in the slipping sand, so the climb
is much more difficult and takes more energy.
The NASA Planetary Protection Office, which provides international guidance on these issues, has sponsored
the first space mission to test asteroid deflection technology. The DART (Double Asteroid Redirection Test) was
launched in November 2021 from the Vandenberg spaceport in California, now coincidentally operated by the
military U.S. Space Force. Eleven months later, the 500-kg spacecraft will impact at a speed of about 6 km/s
into Dimorphos, the 160 m diameter moon of asteroid Didymos. This will occur at a time in 2022 when the two
objects are relatively close to Earth. The objective is to measure the momentum transferred to the target
asteroid by using telescopes on Earth to track the change in the orbital period of Dimorphos. This mission will
test both our technology to hit such a small object and the efficiency of the change in its orbit around
Didymos. Note that the asteroid orbit is such that there is no possibility that the impact will lead to a later
collision with Earth.
There is increasing international interest in the problem of asteroid impacts. The United Nations has formed
two technical committees on planetary defense, recognizing that the entire planet is at risk from asteroid
impacts. However, the fundamental problem remains one of finding NEAs in time for defensive measures to
be taken. We must be able to find the next impactor before it finds us. And that’s a job for the astronomers.
13.2 • Asteroids and Planetary Defense
13.3
The “Long-Haired” Comets
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Characterize the general physical appearance of comets
Explain the range of cometary orbits
Describe the size and composition of a typical comet’s nucleus
Discuss the atmospheres of comets
Summarize the discoveries of the Rosetta mission
Comets differ from asteroids primarily in their icy composition, a difference that causes them to brighten
dramatically as they approach the Sun, forming a temporary atmosphere. In some early cultures, these socalled “hairy stars” were considered omens of disaster. Today, we no longer fear comets, but eagerly
anticipate those that come close enough to us to put on a good sky show.
Appearance of Comets
A comet is a relatively small chunk of icy material (typically a few kilometers across) that develops an
atmosphere as it approaches the Sun. Later, there may be a very faint, nebulous tail, extending several million
kilometers away from the main body of the comet. Comets have been observed from the earliest times:
accounts of comets are found in the histories of virtually all ancient civilizations. The typical comet, however, is
not spectacular in our skies, instead having the appearance of a rather faint, diffuse spot of light somewhat
smaller than the Moon and many times less brilliant. (Comets seemed more spectacular to people before the
invention of artificial lighting, which compromises our view of the night sky.)
Like the Moon and planets, comets appear to wander among the stars, slowly shifting their positions in the sky
from night to night. Unlike the planets, however, most comets appear at unpredictable times, which perhaps
explain why they frequently inspired fear and superstition in earlier times. Comets typically remain visible for
periods that vary from a couple of weeks to several months. We’ll say more about what they are made of and
how they become visible after we discuss their motions.
Note that still images of comets give the impression that they are moving rapidly across the sky, like a bright
meteor or shooting star. Looking only at such images, it is easy to confuse comets and meteors. But seen in
the real sky, they are very different: the meteor burns up in our atmosphere and is gone in a few seconds,
whereas the comet may be visible for weeks in nearly the same part of the sky.
Comet Orbits
The study of comets as members of the solar system dates from the time of Isaac Newton, who first suggested
that they orbited the Sun on extremely elongated ellipses. Newton’s colleague Edmund Halley (see the
Edmund Halley: Astronomy’s Renaissance Man feature box) developed these ideas, and in 1705, he published
calculations of 24 comet orbits. In particular, he noted that the orbits of the bright comets that had appeared
in the years 1531, 1607, and 1682 were so similar that the three could well be the same comet, returning to
perihelion (closest approach to the Sun) at average intervals of 76 years. If so, he predicted that the object
should next return about 1758. Although Halley had died by the time the comet appeared as he predicted, it
was given the name Comet Halley (rhymes with “valley”) in honor of the astronomer who first recognized it as
a permanent member of our solar system, orbiting around the Sun. Its aphelion (furthest point from the Sun)
is beyond the orbit of Neptune.
We now know from historical records that Comet Halley has actually been observed and recorded on every
passage near the Sun since 239 BCE at intervals ranging from 74 to 79 years. The period of its return varies
somewhat because of orbital changes produced by the pull of the giant planets. In 1910, Earth was brushed by
the comet’s tail, causing much needless public concern. Comet Halley last appeared in our skies in 1986
(Figure 13.16), when it was met by several spacecraft that gave us a wealth of information about its makeup; it
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
will return in 2061.
Figure 13.16 Comet Halley. This composite of three images (one in red, one in green, one in blue) shows Comet Halley as seen with
a large telescope in Chile in 1986. During the time the three images were taken in sequence, the comet moved among the stars. The
telescope was moved to keep the image of the comet steady, causing the stars to appear in triplicate (once in each color) in the
background. (credit: modification of work by ESO)
Edmund Halley: Astronomy’s Renaissance Man
Edmund Halley (Figure 13.17), a brilliant astronomer who made contributions in many fields of science and
statistics, was by all accounts a generous, warm, and outgoing person. In this, he was quite the opposite of
his good friend Isaac Newton, whose great work, the Principia (see Orbits and Gravity), Halley encouraged,
edited, and helped pay to publish. Halley himself published his first scientific paper at age 20, while still in
college. As a result, he was given a royal commission to go to Saint Helena (a remote island off the coast of
Africa where Napoleon would later be exiled) to make the first telescopic survey of the southern sky. After
returning, he received the equivalent of a master’s degree and was elected to the prestigious Royal Society
in England, all at the age of 22.
In addition to his work on comets, Halley was the first astronomer to recognize that the so-called “fixed”
stars move relative to each other, by noting that several bright stars had changed their positions since
Ptolemy’s publication of the ancient Greek catalogs. He wrote a paper on the possibility of an infinite
universe, proposed that some stars may be variable, and discussed the nature and size of nebulae (glowing
cloudlike structures visible in telescopes). While in Saint Helena, Halley observed the planet Mercury going
across the face of the Sun and developed the mathematics of how such transits could be used to establish
the size of the solar system.
VOYAGERS IN ASTRONOMY
13.3 • The “Long-Haired” Comets
In other fields, Halley published the first table of human life expectancies (the precursor of life-insurance
statistics); wrote papers on monsoons, trade winds, and tides (charting the tides in the English Channel for
the first time); laid the foundations for the systematic study of Earth’s magnetic field; studied evaporation
and how inland waters become salty; and even designed an underwater diving bell. He served as a British
diplomat, advising the emperor of Austria and squiring the future czar of Russia around England (avidly
discussing, we are told, both the importance of science and the quality of local brandy).
In 1703, Halley became a professor of geometry at Oxford, and in 1720, he was appointed Astronomer Royal
of England. He continued observing Earth and the sky and publishing his ideas for another 20 years, until
death claimed him at age 85.
Figure 13.17 Edmund Halley (1656–1742). Halley was a prolific contributor to the sciences. His study of comets at the turn of the
eighteenth century helped predict the orbit of the comet that now bears his name.
Only a few comets return in a time measureable in human terms (shorter than a century or two), like Comet
Halley does; these are called short-period comets. Many short-period comets have had their orbits changed by
coming too close to one of the giant planets—most often Jupiter (and they are thus sometimes called Jupiterfamily comets). Most comets have long periods and will take thousands of years to return, if they return at all.
As we will see later in this chapter, most Jupiter-family comets come from a different source than the longperiod comets (those with orbital periods longer than about a century).
Observational records exist for thousands of comets. We were visited by two bright comets in recent decades.
First, in March 1996, came Comet Hyakutake, with a very long tail. A year later, Comet Hale-Bopp appeared; it
was as bright as the brightest stars and remained visible for several weeks, even in urban areas (see the image
that opens this chapter, Figure 13.1) Since then, there have been few comets visible to the naked eye, and
astronomers (both professional and amateur) eagerly await such a visitor.
Table 13.2 lists some well-known comets whose history or appearance is of special interest.
Some Interesting Comets
Name
Period
Significance
Great Comet of 1577
Long
Tycho Brahe showed it was beyond the Moon (a big step in our
understanding)
Table 13.2
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Name
Period
Significance
Great Comet of 1843
Long
Brightest recorded comet; visible in daytime
Daylight Comet of
Long
Brightest comet of the twentieth century
West
Long
Nucleus broke into pieces (1976)
Hyakutake
Long
Passed within 15 million km of Earth (1996)
Hale–Bopp
Long
Brightest recent comet (1997)
Swift-Tuttle
133 years
Parent comet of Perseid meteor shower
Halley
76 years
First comet found to be periodic; explored by spacecraft in 1986
Borrelly
6.8 years
Flyby by Deep Space 1 spacecraft (2000)
Biela
6.7 years
Broke up in 1846 and not seen again
Churyumov-
Gerasimenko
6.5 years
Target of Rosetta mission (2014–16)
Wild 2
6.4 years
Target of Stardust sample return mission (2004)
Tempel 1
5.7 years
Target of Deep Impact mission (2005)
Encke
3.3 years
Shortest known period
Table 13.2
The Comet’s Nucleus
When we look at an active comet, all we normally see is its temporary atmosphere of gas and dust illuminated
by sunlight. This atmosphere is called the comet’s head or coma. Since the gravity of such small bodies is very
weak, the atmosphere is rapidly escaping all the time; it must be replenished by new material, which has to
come from somewhere. The source is the small, solid nucleus inside, just a few kilometers across, usually
hidden by the glow from the much-larger atmosphere surrounding it. The nucleus is the real comet, the
fragment of ancient icy material responsible for the atmosphere and the tail (Figure 13.18).
13.3 • The “Long-Haired” Comets
Figure 13.18 Parts of a Comet. This schematic illustration shows the main parts of a comet. Note that the different structures are
not to scale.
The modern theory of the physical and chemical nature of comets was first proposed by Harvard astronomer
Fred Whipple in 1950. Before Whipple’s work, many astronomers thought that a comet’s nucleus might be a
loose aggregation of solids, sort of an orbiting “gravel bank,” Whipple proposed instead that the nucleus is a
solid object a few kilometers across, composed in substantial part of water ice (but with other ices as well)
mixed with silicate grains and dust. This proposal became known as the “dirty snowball” model.
The water vapor and other volatiles that escape from the nucleus when it is heated can be detected in the
comet’s head and tail, and therefore, we can use spectra to analyze what atoms and molecules the nucleus ice
consists of. However, we are somewhat less certain of the non-icy component. We have never identified a
fragment of solid matter from a comet that has survived passage through Earth’s atmosphere. However,
spacecraft that have approached comets have carried dust detectors, and some comet dust has even been
returned to Earth (see Figure 13.19). It seems that much of the “dirt” in the dirty snowball is dark, primitive
hydrocarbons and silicates, rather like the material thought to be present on the dark, primitive asteroids.
Figure 13.19 Captured Comet Dust. This particle (seen through a microscope) is believed to be a tiny fragment of cometary dust,
collected in the upper atmosphere of Earth. It measures about 10 microns, or 1/100 of a millimeter, across. (credit: NASA/JPL)
Since the nuclei of comets are small and dark, they are difficult to study from Earth. Spacecraft did obtain
direct measurements of a comet nucleus, however, in 1986, when three spacecraft swept past Comet Halley at
close range (see Figure 13.20). Subsequently, other spacecraft have flown close to other comets. In 2005, the
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
NASA Deep Impact spacecraft even carried a probe for a high-speed impact with the nucleus of Comet Tempel
1. But by far, the most productive study of a comet has been by the 2015 Rosetta mission, which we will discuss
shortly.
Figure 13.20 Close-up of Comet Halley. This historic photograph of the black, irregularly shaped nucleus of Comet Halley was
obtained by the ESA Giotto spacecraft from a distance of about 1000 kilometers. The bright areas are jets of material escaping from
the surface. The length of the nucleus is 10 kilometers, and details as small as 1 kilometer can be made out. (credit: modification of
work by ESA)
The Comet’s Atmosphere
The spectacular activity that allows us to see comets is caused by the evaporation of cometary ices heated by
sunlight. Beyond the asteroid belt, where comets spend most of their time, these ices are solidly frozen. But as
a comet approaches the Sun, it begins to warm up. If water (H2O) is the dominant ice, significant quantities
vaporize as sunlight heats the surface above 200 K. This happens for the typical comet somewhat beyond the
orbit of Mars. The evaporating H2O in turn releases the dust that was mixed with the ice. Since the comet’s
nucleus is so small, its gravity cannot hold back either the gas or the dust, both of which flow away into space
at speeds of about 1 kilometer per second.
The comet continues to absorb energy as it approaches the Sun. A great deal of this energy goes into the
evaporation of its ice, as well as into heating the surface. However, recent observations of many comets
indicate that the evaporation is not uniform and that most of the gas is released in sudden spurts, perhaps
confined to a few areas of the surface. Expanding into space at a speed of about 1 kilometer per second, the
comet’s atmosphere can reach an enormous size. The diameter of a comet’s head is often as large as Jupiter,
and it can sometimes approach a diameter of a million kilometers (Figure 13.21).
Figure 13.21 Head of Comet Halley. Here we see the cloud of gas and dust that make up the head, or coma, of Comet Halley in
1986. On this scale, the nucleus (hidden inside the cloud) would be a dot too small to see. (credit: modification of work by NASA/W.
Liller)
Most comets also develop tails as they approach the Sun. A comet’s tail is an extension of its atmosphere,
consisting of the same gas and dust that make up its head. As early as the sixteenth century, observers
realized that comet tails always point away from the Sun (Figure 13.22), not back along the comet’s orbit.
Newton proposed that comet tails are formed by a repulsive force of sunlight driving particles away from the
13.3 • The “Long-Haired” Comets
head—an idea close to our modern view.
Figure 13.22 Comet Orbit and Tail. The orientation of a typical comet tail changes as the comet passes perihelion. Approaching the
Sun, the tail is behind the incoming comet head, but on the way out, the tail precedes the head.
The two different components that make up the tail (the dust and gas) act somewhat differently. The brightest
part of the tail is called the dust tail, to differentiate it from a fainter, straight tail made of ionized gas, called
the ion tail. The ion tail is carried outward by streams of ions (charged particles) emitted by the Sun. As you
can see in Figure 13.23, the smoother dust tail curves a bit, as individual dust particles spread out along the
comet’s orbit, whereas the straight ion tail is pushed more directly outward from the Sun by our star’s wind of
charged particles
Figure 13.23 Comet Tails. (a) As a comet nears the Sun, its features become more visible. In this illustration from NASA showing
Comet Hale-Bopp, you can see a comet’s two tails: the more easily visible dust tail, which can be up to 10 million kilometers long, and
the fainter gas tail (or ion tail), which is up to hundreds of millions of kilometers long. The grains that make up the dust tail are the
size of smoke particles. (b) Comet Mrkos was photographed in 1957 with a wide-field telescope at Palomar Observatory and also
shows a clear distinction between the straight gas tail and the curving dust tail. (credit a: modification of work by ESO/E. Slawik;
credit b: modification of work by Charles Kearns, George O. Abell, and Byron Hill)
These days, comets close to the Sun can be found with spacecraft designed to observe our star. For
example, in early July, 2011, astronomers at the ESA/NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO)
LINK TO LEARNING
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
witnessed a comet (https://openstax.org/l/30ESANASAcomet) streaking toward the Sun, one of almost 3000
such sightings. You can also watch a brief video by NASA entitled “Why Are We Seeing So Many Sungrazing
Comets?”
The Rosetta Comet Mission
The 1976 Giotto flyby of Comet Halley, which gave us the first picture of an active comet nucleus, was a
watershed in our understanding of comets. In the 1990s, European scientists decided to design a much more
ambitious mission that would match orbits with an incoming comet and follow it as it approached the Sun.
They also proposed that a smaller spacecraft would actually try to land on the comet. The 2-ton main
spacecraft was named Rosetta, carrying a dozen scientific instruments, and its 100-kilogram lander with nine
more instruments was named Philae.
The Rosetta mission was launched in 2004. Delays with the launch rocket caused it to miss its original target
comet, so an alternate destination was picked, Comet Churyumov-Gerasimenko (named after the two
discoverers, but generally denoted 67P). This comet’s period of revolution is 6.45 years, making it a Jupiterfamily comet.
Since the European Space Agency did not have access to the plutonium-fueled nuclear power sources used by
NASA for deep space missions, Rosetta had to be solar powered, requiring especially large solar panels. Even
these were not enough to keep the craft operating as it matched orbits with 67P near the comet’s aphelion.
The only solution was to turn off all the spacecraft systems and let it coast for several years toward the Sun,
out of contact with controllers on Earth until solar energy was stronger. The success of the mission depended
on an automatic timer to turn the power back on as it neared the Sun. Fortunately, this strategy worked.
In August 2014, Rosetta began a gradual approach to the comet nucleus, which is a strangely misshapen
object about 5 kilometers across, quite different from the smooth appearance of Halley’s nucleus (but equally
dark). Its rotation period is 12 hours. On November 12, 2014, the Philae lander was dropped, descending
slowly for 7 hours before gently hitting the surface. It bounced and rolled, coming to rest under an overhang
where there was not enough sunlight to keep its batteries charged. After operating for a few hours and
sending data back to the orbiter, Philae went silent. The main Rosetta spacecraft continued operations,
however, as the level of comet activity increased, with steamers of gas jetting from the surface. As the comet
approached perihelion in September 2015, the spacecraft backed off to ensure its safety.
The extent of the Rosetta images (and data from other instruments) far exceeds anything astronomers had
seen before from a comet. The best imaging resolution was nearly a factor of 100 greater than in the best
Halley images. At this scale, the comet appears surprisingly rough, with sharp angles, deep pits, and
overhangs (Figure 13.24).
13.3 • The “Long-Haired” Comets
Figure 13.24 Comet 67P’s Strange Shape and Surface Features. (a) This image from the Rosetta camera was taken from a distance
of 285 kilometers. The resolution is 5 meters. You can see that the comet consists of two sections with a connecting “neck” between
them. (b) This close-up view of Comet Churyumov-Gerasimenko is from the Philae lander. One of the lander’s three feet is visible in
the foreground. The lander itself is mostly in shadow. (credit a: modification of work by ESA/Rosetta/MPS for OSIRIS Team MPS/UPD/
LAM/IAA/SSO/INTA/UPM/DASP/IDA; credit b: modification of work by ESA/Rosetta/Philae/CIVA)
The double-lobed shape of 67P’s nucleus has been tentatively attributed to the collision and merger of two
independent comet nuclei long ago. The spacecraft verified that the comet’s dark surface was covered with
organic carbon-rich compounds, mixed with sulfides and iron-nickel grains. 67P has an average density of only
0.5 g/cm3 (recall water in these units has a density of 1 g/cm3.) This low density indicates that the comet is
quite porous, that is, there is a large amount of empty space among its materials.
We already knew that the evaporation of comet ices was sporadic and limited to small jets, but in comet 67P,
this was carried to an extreme. At any one time, more than 99% of the surface is inactive. The active vents are
only a few meters across, with the material confined to narrow jets that persist for just a few minutes (Figure
13.25). The level of activity is strongly dependent on solar heating, and between July and August 2015, it
increased by a factor of 10. Isotopic analysis of deuterium in the water ejected by the comet shows that it is
different from the water found on Earth. Thus, apparently comets like 67P did not contribute to the origin of
our oceans or the water in our bodies, as some scientists had thought.
Figure 13.25 Gas Jets on Comet 67P. "(a and b) Jet activity was photographed by the Rosetta spacecraft near perihelion. You can see
a jet suddenly appearing; it was active for only a few minutes. (c) This spectacular photo, taken near perihelion, shows the active
comet surrounded by multiple jets of gas and dust. (credit a, b: modification of work by ESA/Rosetta/MPS; credit c: modification of
work by ESA/Rosetta/NAVCAM)
The European Space Agency is continuing to make interesting short videos (https://openstax.org/l/
LINK TO LEARNING
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
30ESAvideoros) illustrating the challenges and results of the Rosetta and Philae missions. For example,
watch “Rosetta’s Moment in the Sun” to see some of the images of the comet generating plumes of gas
and dust and hear about some of the dangers an active comet poses for the spacecraft.
13.4
The Origin and Fate of Comets and Related Objects
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the traits of the centaur objects
Chronicle the discovery and describe the composition of the Oort cloud
Describe trans-Neptunian and Kuiper-belt objects
Explain the proposed fate of comets that enter the inner solar system
The comets we notice when they come near Earth (especially the ones coming for the first time) are probably
the most primitive objects we can study, preserved unchanged for billions of years in the deep freeze of the
outer solar system. However, astronomers have discovered many other objects that orbit the Sun beyond the
planets.
Centaurs and TNOs
In the outer solar system, where most objects contain large amounts of water ice, the distinction between
asteroids and comets breaks down. Astronomers initially still used the name “asteroids” for new objects
discovered going around the Sun with orbits that carry them far beyond Jupiter. The first of these objects is
Chiron, found in 1977 on a path that carries it from just inside the orbit of Saturn at its closest approach to the
Sun out to almost the distance of Uranus (Figure 13.26). The diameter of Chiron is estimated to be about 200
kilometers, much larger than any known comet.
Figure 13.26 Chiron’s Orbit. Chiron orbits the Sun every 50 years, with its closest approach being inside the orbit of Saturn and its
farthest approach out to the orbit of Uranus.
13.4 • The Origin and Fate of Comets and Related Objects
In 1992, a still-more-distant object named Pholus was discovered with an orbit that takes it 33 AU from the
Sun, beyond the orbit of Neptune. Pholus has the reddest surface of any object in the solar system, indicating
a strange (and still unknown) surface composition. As more objects are discovered in these distant reaches,
astronomers decided that they will be given the names of centaurs from classical mythology; this is because
the centaurs were half human, half horse, and these new objects display some of the properties of both
asteroids and comets.
Beyond the orbit of Neptune lies a cold, dark realm populated by objects called simply trans-Neptunian objects
(TNOs). The first discovered, and best known, of these TNOs is the dwarf planet Pluto. We discussed Pluto and
the New Horizons spacecraft encounter with it in Rings, Moons, and Pluto. The second TNO was discovered in
1992, and now more than a thousand are known, most of them smaller than Pluto. In late 2018, a team of
astronomers announced the discovery of the most distant TNO found so far, orbiting at 120 Astronomical
Units, or 3 ½ times the distance of Pluto; they nicknamed it “farout.”
The largest ones after Pluto—named Eris, Makemake, and Haumea—are also classed as dwarf planets. Except
for their small size, dwarf planets have many properties in common with the larger planets. Pluto has five
moons, and two moons have been discovered orbiting Haumea and one each circling Eris and Makemake.
The Kuiper Belt and the Oort Cloud
TNOs are a part of what is called the Kuiper belt, a large area of space beyond Neptune that is also the source
of many comets. Astronomers study the Kuiper belt in two ways. New, more powerful telescopes allow us to
discover many of the larger members of the Kuiper belt directly. We can also measure the composition of
short-period comets that are thought to originate in the Kuiper belt, where small gravitational perturbations
from Neptune can gradually shift their orbits until they can penetrate the inner solar system. More than a
thousand Kuiper belt objects have been discovered, and astronomers estimate that there are more than
100,000 with diameters larger than 100 kilometers, in a disk extending out to about 50 AU from the Sun.
Following its successful flyby of Pluto, the New Horizons spacecraft explored the Kuiper Belt. The team
eventually identified a member of the belt, 2014 MU16 (subsequently named Arrokoth), that could be reached
by a slight change in the spacecraft trajectory. New Horizons flew past Arrokoth on January 1, 2019, at a
distance of only 3,500 km, obtaining images and other data. The target turned out to be a contact binary,
something new and unexpected (see photo).
By following their orbits backward, we can calculate that the aphelia (points farthest from the Sun) of newly
discovered comets typically have values near 50,000 AU (more than a thousand times farther than Pluto). This
clustering of aphelion distances was first noted by Dutch astronomer Jan Oort, who, in 1950, proposed an idea
for the origin of those comets that is still accepted today (Figure 13.27).
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Figure 13.27 Jan Oort (1900–1992). (a) Jan Oort first suggested that there might be a reservoir of frozen chunks, potential comet
nuclei, at the edge of the region of the Sun’s gravitational influence. (b) The first color image of the Kuiper Belt Object named
Arrokoth, taken at a distance of 137,000 kilometers from the New Horizons spacecraft on January 1, 2019. (credit (a): This image is
copyright by the Leiden Observatory; credit (b): NASA/JHU/SWRI)
It is possible to calculate that a star’s gravitational sphere of influence—the distance within which it can exert
sufficient gravitation to hold onto orbiting objects—is about one third of its distance to the nearest other stars.
Stars in the vicinity of the Sun are spaced in such a way that the Sun’s sphere of influence extends a little
beyond 50,000 AU, or about 1 light-year. At such great distances, however, objects in orbit about the Sun can
be perturbed by the gravity of passing stars. Some of the perturbed objects can then take on orbits that bring
them much closer to the Sun (while others might be lost to the solar system forever).
Oort suggested, therefore, that the new comets we were seeing were examples of objects orbiting the Sun
near the edge of its sphere of influence, whose orbits had been disturbed by nearby stars, eventually bringing
them close to the Sun where we can see them.1 The reservoir of ancient icy objects from which such comets
are derived is now called the Oort cloud.
Astronomers estimate that there are about a trillion (1012) comets in the Oort cloud. In addition, we estimate
that about 10 times this number of icy objects could be orbiting the Sun in the volume of space between the
Kuiper belt (which is gravitationally linked to Neptune) and the Oort cloud. These objects remain undiscovered
because they are too faint to be seen directly and their orbits are too stable to permit any of them to be
deflected inward close to the Sun. The total number of icy or cometary objects in the outer reaches of our solar
system could thus be on the order of 10 trillion (1013), a very large number indeed.
What is the mass represented by 1013 comets? We can make an estimate if we assume something about comet
sizes and masses. Let us suppose that the nucleus of Comet Halley is typical. Its observed volume is about 600
km3. If the primary constituent is water ice with a density of about 1 g/cm3, then the total mass of Halley’s
nucleus must be about 6 × 1014 kilograms. This is about one ten billionth (10–10) of the mass of Earth.
If our estimate is reasonable and there are 1013 comets with this mass out there, their total mass would be
equal to about 1000 Earths—comparable to the mass of all the planets put together. Therefore, icy, cometary
material could be the most important constituent of the solar system after the Sun itself.
We now know that not every comet we see originates in the Kuiper Belt or Oort Cloud. In 2017 and 2019, astronomers discovered
two “interstellar comets,” (named 1I/Oumuamua and 2I/Borisov) whose orbits indicated that they came from outside the solar
system! (Oumoumua means scout or messenger in Hawaiian.)
13.4 • The Origin and Fate of Comets and Related Objects
E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1
Mass of the Oort Cloud Comets
Suppose the Oort cloud contains 1012 comets with an average diameter of 10 km each. Let’s estimate the
mass of the total Oort cloud.
Solution
We can start by assuming that typical comets are about the size of Comets Halley and Borrelly, with a
diameter of 10 km and a density appropriate to water ice, which is about 1 g/cm3 or 1000 kg/m3. We know
that density = mass/volume, the volume of a sphere,
and the radius,
Therefore, for
each comet,
Given that 10 km = 104 m, each comet’s mass is
To calculate the total mass of the cloud, we multiply this typical mass for one comet by the number of
comets:
Check Your Learning
How does the total mass we calculated above compare to the mass of Jupiter? To the mass of the Sun?
(Give a numerical answer.)
Answer:
The mass of Jupiter is about 1.9 × 1027 kg. The mass of the Oort cloud calculated above is 1027 kg. So the
cloud would contain about half a Jupiter of mass. The mass of the Sun is 2 × 1030 kg. This means the Oort
cloud would be
Early Evolution of the Planetary System
Comets from the Oort cloud help us sample material that formed very far from the Sun, whereas the shortperiod comets from the Kuiper belt sample materials that were planetesimals in the solar nebula disk but did
not form planets. Studies of the Kuiper belt also are influencing our understanding of the early evolution of
our planetary system.
The objects in the Oort cloud and the Kuiper belt have different histories, and they may therefore have
different compositions. Astronomers are therefore very interested in comparing detailed measurements of the
comets derived from these two source regions. Most of the bright comets that have been studied in the past
(such as Hyakutake and Hale-Bopp) are Oort cloud comets, but P67 and several other comets targeted for
spacecraft measurements in the next decade are Jupiter-family comets from the Kuiper belt (see Table 13.2).
The Kuiper belt is made up of ice-and-rock planetesimals, a remnant of the building blocks of the planets.
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Since it is gravitationally linked to Neptune, it can help us understand the formation and history of the solar
system. As the giant planets formed, their gravity profoundly influenced the orbits of Kuiper belt objects.
Computer simulations of the early evolution of the planetary system suggest that the gravitational interactions
between the giant planets and the remaining planetesimals caused the orbit of Jupiter to drift inward, whereas
the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune all expanded, carrying the Kuiper belt with them.
Another hypotheses involves a fifth giant planet that was expelled from the solar system entirely as the
planetary orbits shifted. Neptune’s retrograde (backward-orbiting) moon Triton (which is nearly as large as
Pluto) may have been a Kuiper belt object captured by Neptune during the period of shifting orbits. It clearly
seems that the Kuiper belt may carry important clues to the way our solar system reached its present
planetary configuration.
Comet Hunting as a Hobby
When amateur astronomer David Levy (Figure 13.28), the co-discoverer of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, found
his first comet, he had already spent 928 fruitless hours searching through the dark night sky. But the
discovery of the first comet only whetted his appetite. Since then, he has found 8 others on his own and 13
more working with others. Despite this impressive record, he ranks only third in the record books for
number of comet discoveries. But David hopes to break the record someday.
All around the world, dedicated amateur observers spend countless nights scanning the sky for new
comets. Astronomy is one of the very few fields of science where amateurs can still make a meaningful
contribution, and the discovery of a comet is one of the most exciting ways they can establish their place in
astronomical history. Don Machholz, a California amateur (and comet hunter) who has been making a
study of comet discoveries, reported that between 1975 and 1995, 38% of all comets discovered were found
by amateurs. Those 20 years yielded 67 comets for amateurs, or almost 4 per year. That might sound pretty
encouraging to new comet hunters, until they learn that the average number of hours the typical amateur
spent searching for a comet before finding one was about 420. Clearly, this is not an activity for impatient
personalities.
What do comet hunters do if they think they have found a new comet? First, they must check the object’s
location in an atlas of the sky to make sure it really is a comet. Since the first sighting of a comet usually
occurs when it is still far from the Sun and before it sports a significant tail, it will look like only a small, fuzzy
patch. And through most amateur telescopes, so will nebulae (clouds of cosmic gas and dust) and galaxies
(distant groupings of stars). Next, they must check that they have not come across a comet that is already
known, in which case, they will only get a pat on the back instead of fame and glory. Then they must reobserve or re-image it sometime later to see whether its motion in the sky is appropriate for comets.
Often, comet hunters who think they have made a discovery get another comet hunter elsewhere in the
country to confirm it. If everything checks out, the place they contact is the Central Bureau for Astronomical
Telegrams at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Massachusetts
(http://www.cbat.eps.harvard.edu/). If the discovery is confirmed, the bureau will send the news out to
astronomers and observatories around the world. One of the unique rewards of comet hunting is that the
discoverer’s name becomes associated with the new comet—a bit of cosmic fame that few hobbies can
match.
MAKING CONNECTIONS
13.4 • The Origin and Fate of Comets and Related Objects
Figure 13.28 David Levy. Amateur astronomer David Levy ranks third in the world for comet discoveries. (credit: Andrew
Fraknoi)
The Fate of Comets
Any comet we see today will have spent nearly its entire existence in the Oort cloud or the Kuiper belt at a
temperature near absolute zero. But once a comet enters the inner solar system, its previously uneventful life
history begins to accelerate. It may, of course, survive its initial passage near the Sun and return to the cold
reaches of space where it spent the previous 4.5 billion years. At the other extreme, it may collide with the Sun
or come so close that it is destroyed on its first perihelion passage (several such collisions have been observed
with space telescopes that monitor the Sun). Sometimes, however, the new comet does not come that close to
the Sun but instead interacts with one or more of the planets.
SOHO (the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory) has an excellent collection of videos of comets
(https://openstax.org/l/30SOHOcomvid) that come near the Sun. At this site, comet ISON approaches the
Sun and is believed to be destroyed in its passage.
A comet that comes within the gravitational influence of a planet has three possible fates. It can (1) impact the
planet, ending the story at once; (2) speed up and be ejected, leaving the solar system forever; or (3) be
perturbed into an orbit with a shorter period. In the last case, its fate is sealed. Each time it approaches the
Sun, it loses part of its material and also has a significant chance of collision with a planet. Once the comet is in
this kind of short-period orbit, its lifetime starts being measured in thousands, not billions, of years.
A few comets end their lives catastrophically by breaking apart (sometimes for no apparent reason) (Figure
13.29). Especially spectacular was the fate of the faint Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9, which broke into about 20
pieces when it passed close to Jupiter in July 1992. The fragments of Shoemaker-Levy were actually captured
into a very elongated, two-year orbit around Jupiter, more than doubling the number of known jovian moons.
This was only a temporary enrichment of Jupiter’s family, however, because in July 1994, all the comet
fragments crashed unto Jupiter, releasing energy equivalent to millions of megatons of TNT.
LINK TO LEARNING
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Figure 13.29 Breakup of Comet LINEAR. (a) A ground-based view with much less detail and (b) a much more detailed photo with
the Hubble Space Telescope, showing the multiple fragments of the nucleus of Comet LINEAR. The comet disintegrated in July 2000
for no apparent reason. (Note in the left view, the fragments all blend their light together, and can’t be distinguished. The short
diagonal white lines are stars that move in the image, which is keeping track of the moving comet.) (credit a: modification of work by
the University of Hawaii; credit b: modification of work by NASA, Harold Weaver (the Johns Hopkins University), and the HST Comet
LINEAR Investigation Team)
As each cometary fragment streaked into the jovian atmosphere at a speed of 60 kilometers per second, it
disintegrated and exploded, producing a hot fireball that carried the comet dust as well as atmospheric gases
to high altitudes. These fireballs were clearly visible in profile, with the actual point of impact just beyond the
jovian horizon as viewed from Earth (Figure 13.30). As each explosive plume fell back into Jupiter, a region of
the upper atmosphere larger than Earth was heated to incandescence and glowed brilliantly for about 15
minutes, a glow we could detect with infrared-sensitive telescopes.
Figure 13.30 Comet Impact on Jupiter. (a) The “string” of white objects are fragments of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 approaching
Jupiter. (b) The first fragment of the comet impacts Jupiter, with the point of contact on the bottom left side in this image. On the
right is Jupiter’s moon, Io. The equally bright spot in the top image is the comet fragment flaring to maximum brightness. The
bottom image, taken about 20 minutes later, shows the lingering flare from the impact. The Great Red Spot is visible near the center
of Jupiter. These infrared images were taken with a German-Spanish telescope on Calar Alto in southern Spain. (credit a:
modification of work by ESA; credit b: modification of work by Tom Herbst, Max-Planck-Institut fuer Astronomie, Heidelberg, Doug
13.4 • The Origin and Fate of Comets and Related Objects
Hamilton, Max-Planck-Institut fuer Kernphysik, Heidelberg, Hermann Boehnhardt, Universitaets-Sternewarte, Muenchen, and Jose
Luis Ortiz Moreno, Instituto de Astrofisica de Andalucia, Granada)
After this event, dark clouds of debris settled into the stratosphere of Jupiter, producing long-lived “bruises”
(each still larger than Earth) that could be easily seen through even small telescopes (Figure 13.31). Millions of
people all over the world peered at Jupiter through telescopes or followed the event via television or online.
Another, smaller, impact feature was seen on Jupiter in summer 2009 (and six more since), indicating that the
1994 events were by no means unique. Seeing these large, impact explosions on Jupiter helps us to appreciate
the disaster that would happen to our planet if we were hit by a comet or asteroid.
Figure 13.31 Impact Dust Cloud on Jupiter. These features result from the impact of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter, seen
with the Hubble Space Telescope 105 minutes after the impact that produced the dark rings (the compact back dot came from
another fragment). The inner edge of the diffuse, outer ring is about the same size as Earth. Later, the winds on Jupiter blended
these features into a broad spot that remained visible for more than a month. (credit: modification of work by H. Hammel, MIT, and
NASA/ESA)
For comets that do not meet so dramatic an end, measurements of the amount of gas and dust in their
atmospheres permit us to estimate the total losses during one orbit. Typical loss rates are up to a million tons
per day from an active comet near the Sun, adding up to some tens of millions of tons per orbit. At that rate, a
typical comet will be gone after a few thousand orbits. This will probably be the fate of Comet Halley in the
long run.
Earlier we mentioned that comets can also escape the solar system. In 2019, astronomers discovered comet
2I/Borisov, which came from a planetary system other than ours. It is only the second interstellar object we
have found, and the first that is rich in volatile materials such as water and carbon compounds. The presence
of an atmosphere allowed its composition to be studied. Borisov contains much more carbon monoxide than
normal solar system comets, which tells us that it was probably formed in a cooler location, perhaps around a
red dwarf star.
Watch this 4-minute NASA retrospective on the collision of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter History
Channel video (https://openstax.org/l/30shoemaker) to learn more.
LINK TO LEARNING
13 • Comets and Asteroids: Debris of the Solar System
Key Terms
asteroid
a stony or metallic object orbiting the Sun that is smaller than a planet but that shows no evidence
of an atmosphere or of other types of activity associated with comets
asteroid belt
the region of the solar system between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter in which most asteroids
are located; the main belt, where the orbits are generally the most stable, extends from 2.2 to 3.3 AU from
the Sun
comet
a small body of icy and dusty matter that revolves about the Sun; when a comet comes near the Sun,
some of its material vaporizes, forming a large head of tenuous gas and often a tail
Kuiper belt
a region of space beyond Neptune that is dynamically stable (like the asteroid belt); the source
region for most short-period comets
near-Earth asteroid (NEA)
an Earth-approaching asteroid, one whose orbit could bring it on a collision
course with our planet
near-Earth object (NEO)
a comet or asteroid whose path intersects the orbit of Earth
nucleus (of a comet)
the solid chunk of ice and dust in the head of a comet
Oort cloud
the large spherical region around the Sun from which most “new” comets come; a reservoir of
objects with aphelia at about 50,000 AU
tail
(of a comet) a tail consisting of two parts: the dust tail is made of dust loosened by the sublimation of ice
in a comet that is then pushed by photons from the Sun into a curved stream; the ion tail is a stream of
ionized particles evaporated from a comet and then swept away from the Sun by the solar wind
Summary
13.1 Asteroids
The solar system includes many objects that are much smaller than the planets and their larger moons. The
rocky ones are generally called asteroids. Ceres is the largest asteroid; about 15 are larger than 250 kilometers
and about 100,000 are larger than 1 kilometer. Most are in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. The
presence of asteroid families in the belt indicates that many asteroids are the remnants of ancient collisions
and fragmentation. The asteroids include both primitive and differentiated objects. Most asteroids are classed
as C-type, meaning they are composed of carbonaceous materials. Dominating the inner belt are S-type
(stony) asteroids, with a few M-type (metallic) ones. We have spacecraft images of several asteroids and
returned samples from three asteroids. Recent observations have detected a number of asteroid moons,
making it possible to measure the masses and densities of the asteroids they orbit. The two largest asteroids,
Ceres and Vesta, have been extensively studied from orbit by the Dawn spacecraft.
13.2 Asteroids and Planetary Defense
Near-Earth asteroids (NEAs), and near-Earth objects (NEOs) in general, are of interest in part because of their
potential to hit Earth. They are on unstable orbits, and on timescales of 100 million years, they will either
impact one of the terrestrial planets or the Sun, or be ejected. Most of them probably come from the asteroid
belt, but some may be dead comets. NASA’s Spaceguard Survey has found 90% of the NEAs larger than 1
kilometer, and none of the ones found so far are on a collision course with Earth. Scientists are actively
working on possible technologies for planetary defense in case any NEOs are found on a collision course with
Earth years in advance. For now, the most important task is to continue our surveys, so we can find the next
Earth impactor before it finds us.
13.3 The “Long-Haired” Comets
Halley first showed that some comets are on closed orbits and return periodically to swing around the Sun.
The heart of a comet is its nucleus, a few kilometers in diameter and composed of volatiles (primarily frozen
H2O) and solids (including both silicates and carbonaceous materials). Whipple first suggested this “dirty
snowball” model in 1950; it has been confirmed by spacecraft studies of several comets. As the nucleus
13 • Key Terms
approaches the Sun, its volatiles evaporate (perhaps in localized jets or explosions) to form the comet’s head
or atmosphere, which escapes at about 1 kilometer per second. The atmosphere streams away from the Sun
to form a long tail. The ESA Rosetta mission to Comet P67 (Churyumov-Gerasimenko) has greatly increased
our knowledge of the nature of the nucleus and of the process by which comets release water and other
volatiles when heated by sunlight.
13.4 The Origin and Fate of Comets and Related Objects
Oort proposed in 1950 that long-period comets are derived from what we now call the Oort cloud, which
surrounds the Sun out to about 50,000 AU (near the limit of the Sun’s gravitational sphere of influence) and
contains between 1012 and 1013 comets. Comets also come from the Kuiper belt, a disk-shaped region beyond
the orbit of Neptune, extending to 50 AU from the Sun. Comets are primitive bodies left over from the
formation of the outer solar system. Once a comet is diverted into the inner solar system, it typically survives
no more than a few thousand perihelion passages before losing all its volatiles. Some comets die spectacular
deaths: Shoemaker-Levy 9, for example, broke into 20 pieces before colliding with Jupiter in 1994.
For Further Exploration
Articles
Asteroids
Asphang, E. “The Small Planets.” Scientific American (May 2000): 46. On asteroids, including results from the
NEAR mission.
Beatty, J. “The Falcon’s Wild Flight.” Sky & Telescope (September 2006): 34. On the Japanese mission to
asteroid Itakawa.
Beatty, J. “NEAR Falls for Eros.” Sky & Telescope (May 2001): 35. On the first landing on an asteroid.
Betz, E. “Dawn Mission Reveals Dwarf Planet Ceres.” Astronomy (January 2016): 44. First images and
discoveries.
Binzel, R. “A New Century for Asteroids.” Sky & Telescope (July 2001): 44. Nice overview.
Boslaugh, M. “In Search of Death-Plunge Asteroids.” Astronomy (July 2015): 28. On existing and proposed
programs to search for Earth-crossing asteroids.
Cooke, B. “Fatal Attraction.” Astronomy (May 2006): 46. On near-Earth asteroid Apophis, its orbit, and what we
can learn from it.
Durda, D. “Odd Couples.” Astronomy (December 2005): 54. On binary asteroids.
Durda, D. “All in the Family.” Astronomy (February 1993): 36. Discusses asteroid families.
Oberg, J. “2013’s Historic Russian Meteorite Fall” Astronomy (June 2012): 18. On the Chelyabinsk event.
Sheppard, S. “Dancing with the Planets.” Sky & Telescope (June 2016): 16. On Trojan asteroids that “follow”
planets like Jupiter.
Talcott, R. “Galileo Views Gaspra.” Astronomy (February 1992): 52.
Yeomans, D. “Japan Visits an Asteroid.” Astronomy (March 2006): 32. On the Hayabusa probe exploration of
asteroid Itakawa.
Zimmerman, R. “Ice Cream Sundaes and Mashed Potatoes.” Astronomy (February 1999): 54. On the NEAR
mission.
13 • For Further Exploration
Comets
Aguirre, E. “The Great Comet of 1997.” Sky & Telescope (July 1997): 50. On Comet Hale-Bopp.
Bakich, M. “How to Observe Comets.” Astronomy (December 2009): 50. A guide for amateur astronomers.
Gore, R. “Halley’s Comet ’86: Much More Than Met the Eye.” National Geographic (December 1986): 758. (Also,
the March 1987 issue of Sky & Telescope was devoted to what we learned from Halley’s Comet in 1986.)
Hale, A. “Hale-Bopp Plus Ten.” Astronomy (July 2005): 76. The co-discoverer of a naked-eye comet tells the
story of the discovery and what followed.
Jewett, D. “Mysterious Travelers: Comet Science.” Sky & Telescope (December. 2013): 18. Nice summary of
what we know about comets and questions we have.
Rao, J. “How Often do Bright Comets Appear?” Sky & Telescope (November 2013): 30. Nice summary of bright
comets in the last century and what factors make a comet spectacular in our skies.
Sekanina, Z. “Sungrazing Comets.” Astronomy (March 2006): 36.
Sheppard, S. “Beyond the Kuiper Belt.” Sky & Telescope (March 2015): 26. On Sedna and the Oort cloud.
Stern, S. “Evolution at the Edge.” Astronomy (September 2005): 46. How comet nuclei evolve with time.
Talcott, R. “Rendezvous with an Evolving Comet [Rosetta at Comet 67P/C-G].” Astronomy (September 2015):
44.
Tytell, D. “Deep Impact’s Hammer Throw.” Sky & Telescope (October 2006): 34. On the mission that threw a
probe at the nucleus of a comet. See also (June 2005): 40.
Weissman, P. “A Comet Tale.” Sky & Telescope (February 2006): 36. A nice review of what we know and don’t
know about the physical nature of comets.
Websites
Asteroids
Dawn Mission: http://dawn.jpl.nasa.gov (http://dawn.jpl.nasa.gov). Discover more about this mission to the
largest asteroids.
NEAR-Shoemaker Mission: http://near.jhuapl.edu/ (http://near.jhuapl.edu/). Review background information
and see great images from the mission that went by Mathilde and Eros.
Comets
Deep Impact Mission: http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/deepimpact/main/ (http://www.nasa.gov/
mission_pages/deepimpact/main/).
Kuiper Belt: http://www2.ess.ucla.edu/~jewitt/kb.html (http://www2.ess.ucla.edu/~jewitt/kb.html). David
Jewitt of the University of Hawaii keeps track of the objects that have been discovered.
Missions to Comets: https://sci.esa.int/web/rosetta/-/54343-missions-to-comets (https://sci.esa.int/web/
rosetta/-/54343-missions-to-comets). Information on NASA and ESA spacecraft that have explored comets.
Stardust Mission: http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/home/index.html (http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/home/
index.html). Learn about this mission to collect a sample of a comet and bring it back to Earth.
Videos
Asteroids
Sweating the Small Stuff: The Fear and Fun of Near-Earth Asteroids: https://www.youtube.com/
13 • For Further Exploration
watch?v=5gyAvc5OhII (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5gyAvc5OhII). Harvard Observatory Night
Lecture by Jose-Luis Galache (1:18:07).
Unveiling Dwarf Planet Ceres: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_G9LudkLWOY (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=_G9LudkLWOY). A vonKarman Lecture by Dr. Carol Raymond, Oct. 2015, also includes Vesta results
(1:18:38).
Comets
Great Comets, Comets in General, and Comet ISON: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DiBkYAnQ_CY
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DiBkYAnQ_CY). Talk by Frank Summers, Space Telescope Science
Institute (1:01:10).
Press Conference on the Impact of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=B-tUP8afEIo (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B-tUP8afEIo). Day 2 after impact; July 17, 1994;
with the discoverers and Heidi Hammel (1:22:29).
Rosetta: The Story So Far: https://ras.ac.uk/events-and-meetings/rosetta-story-so-far (https://ras.ac.uk/
events-and-meetings/rosetta-story-so-far). Royal Astronomical Society Lecture by Dr. Ian Wright (1:00:29).
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
Your group is a congressional committee charged with evaluating the funding for an effort to find all the
NEAs (near-Earth asteroids) that are larger than 0.5 kilometers across. Make a list of reasons it would be
useful to humanity to find such objects. What should we (could we) do if we found one that will hit Earth in
a few years?
B.
Many cultures considered comets bad omens. Legends associate comets with the deaths of kings, losses
in war, or ends of dynasties. Did any members of your group ever hear about such folktales? Discuss
reasons why comets in earlier times may have gotten this bad reputation.
C.
Because asteroids have a variety of compositions and a low gravity that makes the removal of materials
quite easy, some people have suggested that mining asteroids may be a way to get needed resources in
the future. Make a list of materials in asteroids (and comets that come to the inner solar system) that may
be valuable to a space-faring civilization. What are the pros and cons of undertaking mining operations on
these small worlds?
D.
As discussed in the feature box on Comet Hunting as a Hobby, amateur comet hunters typically spend
more than 400 hours scanning the skies with their telescopes to find a comet. That’s a lot of time to spend
(usually alone, usually far from city lights, usually in the cold, and always in the dark). Discuss with
members of your group whether you can see yourself being this dedicated. Why do people undertake
such quests? Do you envy their dedication?
E.
The largest Kuiper belt objects known are also called dwarf planets. All the planets (terrestrial, jovian, and
dwarf) in our solar system have so far been named after mythological gods. (The dwarf planet names
have moved away from Roman mythology to include the gods of other cultures.) Have your group discuss
whether we should continue this naming tradition with newly discovered dwarf planets. Why or why not?
F.
The total cost of the Rosetta mission to match courses with a comet was about 1.4 billion Euros (about
$1.6 billion US). Have your group discuss whether this investment was worth it, giving reasons for
whichever side you choose. (On the European Space Agency website, they put this cost in context by
saying, “The figure is barely half the price of a modern submarine, or three Airbus 380 jumbo jets, and
covers a period of almost 20 years, from the start of the project in 1996 through the end of the mission in
2015.”)
G.
If an Earth-approaching asteroid were discovered early enough, humanity could take measures to prevent
13 • Collaborative Group Activities
a collision. Discuss possible methods for deflecting or even destroying an asteroid or comet. Go beyond
the few methods mentioned in the text and use your creativity. Give pros and cons for each method.
Exercises
Review Questions
1. Why are asteroids and comets important to our understanding of solar system history?
2. Give a brief description of the asteroid belt.
3. Describe the main differences between C-type and S-type asteroids.
4. In addition to the ones mentioned in Exercise 13.3, what is the third, rarer class of asteroids?
5. Vesta is unusual as it contains what mineral on its surface? What does the presence of this material
indicate?
6. Compare asteroids of the asteroid belt with Earth-approaching asteroids. What is the main difference
between the two groups?
7. Briefly describe NASA’s Spaceguard Survey. How many objects have been found in this survey?
8. Who first calculated the orbits of comets based on historical records dating back to antiquity?
9. Describe the nucleus of a typical comet and compare it with an asteroid of similar size.
10. Describe the two types of comet tails and how each are formed.
11. What classification is given to objects such as Pluto and Eris, which are large enough to be round, and
whose orbits lie beyond that of Neptune?
12. Describe the origin and eventual fate of the comets we see from Earth.
13. What evidence do we have for the existence of the Kuiper belt? What kind of objects are found there?
14. Give brief descriptions of both the Kuiper belt and the Oort cloud.
Thought Questions
15. Give at least two reasons today’s astronomers are so interested in the discovery of additional Earthapproaching asteroids.
16. Suppose you were designing a spacecraft that would match course with an asteroid and follow along its
orbit. What sorts of instruments would you put on board to gather data, and what would you like to learn?
17. Suppose you were designing a spacecraft that would match course with a comet and move with it for a
while. What sorts of instruments would you put on board to gather data, and what would you like to
learn?
18. Suppose a comet were discovered approaching the Sun, one whose orbit would cause it to collide with
Earth 20 months later, after perihelion passage. (This is approximately the situation described in the
science-fiction novel Lucifer’s Hammer by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle.) What could we do? Would
there be any way to protect ourselves from a catastrophe?
19. We believe that chains of comet fragments like Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9’s have collided not only with the
jovian planets, but occasionally with their moons. What sort of features would you look for on the outer
planet moons to find evidence of such collisions? (As an extra bonus, can you find any images of such
features on a moon like Callisto? You can use an online site of planetary images, such as the Planetary
Photojournal, at photojournal.jpl.nasa.gov.)
13 • Exercises
20. Why have we found so many objects in the Kuiper belt in the last two decades and not before then?
21. Why is it hard to give exact diameters for even the larger objects in the Kuiper belt?
Figuring for Yourself
22. Refer to Example 13.1. How would the calculation change if a typical comet in the Oort cloud is only 1 km
in diameter?
23. Refer to Example 13.1. How would the calculation change if a typical comet in the Oort cloud is
larger—say, 50 km in diameter?
24. The calculation in Example 13.1 refers to the known Oort cloud, the source for most of the comets we see.
If, as some astronomers suspect, there are 10 times this many cometary objects in the solar system, how
does the total mass of cometary matter compare with the mass of Jupiter?
25. If the Oort cloud contains 1012 comets, and ten new comets are discovered coming close to the Sun each
year, what percentage of the comets have been “used up” since the beginning of the solar system?
26. The mass of the asteroids is found mostly in the larger asteroids, so to estimate the total mass we need to
consider only the larger objects. Suppose the three largest asteroids—Ceres (1000 km in diameter), Pallas
(500 km in diameter), and Vesta (500 km in diameter)—account for half the total mass. Assume that each
of these three asteroids has a density of 3 × 103 g/cm3 and calculate their total mass. Multiply your result
by 2 to obtain an estimate for the mass of the total asteroid belt. How does this compare with the mass of
the Oort cloud?
27. Make a similar estimate for the mass of the Kuiper belt. The three largest objects are Pluto, Eris, and
Makemake (each roughly 2000 km). In addition, assume there are eight objects (including Haumea, Orcus,
Quaoar, Ixion, Varuna, and Charon, and objects that have not been named yet) with diameters of about
1000 km. Assume that all objects have Pluto’s density of 2 × 103 g/cm3. Calculate twice the mass of the
largest 13 objects and compare it to the mass of the main asteroid belt.
28. What is the period of revolution about the Sun for an asteroid with a semi-major axis of 3 AU in the middle
of the asteroid belt?
29. What is the period of revolution for a comet with aphelion at 5 AU and perihelion at the orbit of Earth?
13 • Exercises
