Figure 17.1 Star Colors. This long time exposure shows the colors of the stars. The circular motion of the stars across the image is
provided by Earth’s rotation. The various colors of the stars are caused by their different temperatures. (credit: modification of work
by ESO/A.Santerne)
Chapter Outline
17.1 The Brightness of Stars
17.2 Colors of Stars
17.3 The Spectra of Stars (and Brown Dwarfs)
17.4 Using Spectra to Measure Stellar Radius, Composition, and Motion
Thinking Ahead
Everything we know about stars—how they are born, what they are made of, how far away they are, how long
they live, and how they will die—we learn by decoding the messages contained in the light and radiation that
reaches Earth. What questions should we ask, and how do we find the answers?
We can begin our voyage to the stars by looking at the night sky. It is obvious that stars do not all appear
equally bright, nor are they all the same color. To understand the stars, we must first determine their basic
properties, such as what their temperatures are, how much material they contain (their masses), and how
much energy they produce. Since our Sun is a star, of course the same techniques, including spectroscopy,
used to study the Sun can be used to find out what stars are like. As we learn more about the stars, we will use
these characteristics to begin assembling clues to the main problems we are interested in solving: How do
stars form? How long do they survive? What is their ultimate fate?
17.1
The Brightness of Stars
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the difference between luminosity and apparent brightness
Understand how astronomers specify brightness with magnitudes
Analyzing Starlight
17 • Thinking Ahead
Luminosity
Perhaps the most important characteristic of a star is its luminosity—the total amount of energy at all
wavelengths that it emits per second. Earlier, we saw that the Sun puts out a tremendous amount of energy
every second. (And there are stars far more luminous than the Sun out there.) To make the comparison among
stars easy, astronomers express the luminosity of other stars in terms of the Sun’s luminosity. For example,
the luminosity of Sirius is about 25 times that of the Sun. We use the symbol LSun to denote the Sun’s
luminosity; hence, that of Sirius can be written as 25 LSun. In a later chapter, we will see that if we can measure
how much energy a star emits and we also know its mass, then we can calculate how long it can continue to
shine before it exhausts its nuclear energy and begins to die.
Apparent Brightness
Astronomers are careful to distinguish between the luminosity of the star (the total energy output) and the
amount of energy that happens to reach our eyes or a telescope on Earth. Stars are democratic in how they
produce radiation; they emit the same amount of energy in every direction in space. Consequently, only a
minuscule fraction of the energy given off by a star actually reaches an observer on Earth. We call the amount
of a star’s energy that reaches a given area (say, one square meter) each second here on Earth its apparent
brightness. If you look at the night sky, you see a wide range of apparent brightnesses among the stars. Most
stars, in fact, are so dim that you need a telescope to detect them.
If all stars were the same luminosity—if they were like standard bulbs with the same light output—we could
use the difference in their apparent brightnesses to tell us something we very much want to know: how far
away they are. Imagine you are in a big concert hall or ballroom that is dark except for a few dozen 25-watt
bulbs placed in fixtures around the walls. Since they are all 25-watt bulbs, their luminosity (energy output) is
the same. But from where you are standing in one corner, they do not have the same apparent brightness.
Those close to you appear brighter (more of their light reaches your eye), whereas those far away appear
dimmer (their light has spread out more before reaching you). In this way, you can tell which bulbs are closest
to you. In the same way, if all the stars had the same luminosity, we could immediately infer that the brightestappearing stars were close by and the dimmest-appearing ones were far away.
To pin down this idea more precisely, recall from the Radiation and Spectra chapter that we know exactly how
light fades with increasing distance. The energy we receive is inversely proportional to the square of the
distance. If, for example, we have two stars of the same luminosity and one is twice as far away as the other, it
will look four times dimmer than the closer one. If it is three times farther away, it will look nine (three
squared) times dimmer, and so forth.
Alas, the stars do not all have the same luminosity. (Actually, we are pretty glad about that because having
many different types of stars makes the universe a much more interesting place.) But this means that if a star
looks dim in the sky, we cannot tell whether it appears dim because it has a low luminosity but is relatively
nearby, or because it has a high luminosity but is very far away. To measure the luminosities of stars, we must
first compensate for the dimming effects of distance on light, and to do that, we must know how far away they
are. Distance is among the most difficult of all astronomical measurements. We will return to how it is
determined after we have learned more about the stars. For now, we will describe how astronomers specify
the apparent brightness of stars.
The Magnitude Scale
The process of measuring the apparent brightness of stars is called photometry (from the Greek photo
meaning “light” and –metry meaning “to measure”). As we saw Observing the Sky: The Birth of Astronomy,
astronomical photometry began with Hipparchus. Around 150 B.C.E., he erected an observatory on the island
of Rhodes in the Mediterranean. There he prepared a catalog of nearly 1000 stars that included not only their
positions but also estimates of their apparent brightnesses.
17 • Analyzing Starlight
Hipparchus did not have a telescope or any instrument that could measure apparent brightness accurately, so
he simply made estimates with his eyes. He sorted the stars into six brightness categories, each of which he
called a magnitude. He referred to the brightest stars in his catalog as first-magnitudes stars, whereas those
so faint he could barely see them were sixth-magnitude stars. During the nineteenth century, astronomers
attempted to make the scale more precise by establishing exactly how much the apparent brightness of a
sixth-magnitude star differs from that of a first-magnitude star. Measurements showed that we receive about
100 times more light from a first-magnitude star than from a sixth-magnitude star. Based on this
measurement, astronomers then defined an accurate magnitude system in which a difference of five
magnitudes corresponds exactly to a brightness ratio of 100:1. In addition, the magnitudes of stars are
decimalized; for example, a star isn’t just a “second-magnitude star,” it has a magnitude of 2.0 (or 2.1, 2.3, and
so forth). So what number is it that, when multiplied together five times, gives you this factor of 100? Play on
your calculator and see if you can get it. The answer turns out to be about 2.5, which is the fifth root of 100.
This means that a magnitude 1.0 star and a magnitude 2.0 star differ in brightness by a factor of about 2.5.
Likewise, we receive about 2.5 times as much light from a magnitude 2.0 star as from a magnitude 3.0 star.
What about the difference between a magnitude 1.0 star and a magnitude 3.0 star? Since the difference is 2.5
times for each “step” of magnitude, the total difference in brightness is 2.5 × 2.5 = 6.25 times.
Here are a few rules of thumb that might help those new to this system. If two stars differ by 0.75 magnitudes,
they differ by a factor of about 2 in brightness. If they are 2.5 magnitudes apart, they differ in brightness by a
factor of 10, and a 4-magnitude difference corresponds to a difference in brightness of a factor of 40.You
might be saying to yourself at this point, “Why do astronomers continue to use this complicated system from
more than 2000 years ago?” That’s an excellent question and, as we shall discuss, astronomers today can use
other ways of expressing how bright a star looks. But because this system is still used in many books, star
charts, and computer apps, we felt we had to introduce students to it (even though we were very tempted to
leave it out.)
The brightest stars, those that were traditionally referred to as first-magnitude stars, actually turned out
(when measured accurately) not to be identical in brightness. For example, the brightest star in the sky, Sirius,
sends us about 10 times as much light as the average first-magnitude star. On the modern magnitude scale,
Sirius, the star with the brightest apparent magnitude, has been assigned a magnitude of −1.5. Other objects
in the sky can appear even brighter. Venus at its brightest is of magnitude −4.4, while the Sun has a magnitude
of −26.8. Figure 17.2 shows the range of observed magnitudes from the brightest to the faintest, along with
the actual magnitudes of several well-known objects. The important fact to remember when using magnitude
is that the system goes backward: the larger the magnitude, the fainter the object you are observing.
Figure 17.2 Apparent Magnitudes of Well-Known Objects. The faintest magnitudes that can be detected by the unaided eye,
binoculars, and large telescopes are also shown.
17.1 • The Brightness of Stars
E X A M P L E 1 7. 1
The Magnitude Equation
Even scientists can’t calculate fifth roots in their heads, so astronomers have summarized the above
discussion in an equation to help calculate the difference in brightness for stars with different magnitudes.
If m1 and m2 are the magnitudes of two stars, then we can calculate the ratio of their brightness
using this equation:
Here is another way to write this equation:
Let’s do a real example, just to show how this works. Imagine that an astronomer has discovered
something special about a dim star (magnitude 8.5), and she wants to tell her students how much dimmer
the star is than Sirius. Star 1 in the equation will be our dim star and star 2 will be Sirius.
Solution
Remember, Sirius has a magnitude of −1.5. In that case:
Check Your Learning
It is a common misconception that Polaris (magnitude 2.0) is the brightest star in the sky, but, as we saw,
that distinction actually belongs to Sirius (magnitude −1.5). How does Sirius’ apparent brightness compare
to that of Polaris?
Answer:
(Hint: If you only have a basic calculator, you may wonder how to take 100 to the 0.7th power. But this is
something you can ask Google to do. Google now accepts mathematical questions and will answer them.
So try it for yourself. Ask Google, “What is 100 to the 0.7th power?”)
Our calculation shows that Sirius’ apparent brightness is 25 times greater than Polaris’ apparent
brightness.
Other Units of Brightness
Although the magnitude scale is still used for visual astronomy, it is not used at all in newer branches of the
field. In radio astronomy, for example, no equivalent of the magnitude system has been defined. Rather, radio
astronomers measure the amount of energy being collected each second by each square meter of a radio
telescope and express the brightness of each source in terms of, for example, watts per square meter.
Similarly, most researchers in the fields of infrared, X-ray, and gamma-ray astronomy use energy per area per
second rather than magnitudes to express the results of their measurements. Nevertheless, astronomers in all
fields are careful to distinguish between the luminosity of the source (even when that luminosity is all in Xrays) and the amount of energy that happens to reach us on Earth. After all, the luminosity is a really
17 • Analyzing Starlight
important characteristic that tells us a lot about the object in question, whereas the energy that reaches Earth
is an accident of cosmic geography.
To make the comparison among stars easy, in this text, we avoid the use of magnitudes as much as possible
and will express the luminosity of other stars in terms of the Sun’s luminosity. For example, the luminosity of
Sirius is 25 times that of the Sun. We use the symbol LSun to denote the Sun’s luminosity; hence, that of Sirius
can be written as 25 LSun.
17.2
Colors of Stars
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Compare the relative temperatures of stars based on their colors
Understand how astronomers use color indexes to measure the temperatures of stars
Look at the beautiful picture of the stars in the Sagittarius Star Cloud shown in Figure 17.3. The stars show a
multitude of colors, including red, orange, yellow, white, and blue. As we have seen, stars are not all the same
color because they do not all have identical temperatures. To define color precisely, astronomers have devised
quantitative methods for characterizing the color of a star and then using those colors to determine stellar
temperatures. In the chapters that follow, we will provide the temperature of the stars we are describing, and
this section tells you how those temperatures are determined from the colors of light the stars give off.
Figure 17.3 Sagittarius Star Cloud. This image, which was taken by the Hubble Space Telescope, shows stars in the direction toward
the center of the Milky Way Galaxy. The bright stars glitter like colored jewels on a black velvet background. The color of a star
indicates its temperature. Blue-white stars are much hotter than the Sun, whereas red stars are cooler. On average, the stars in this
field are at a distance of about 25,000 light-years (which means it takes light 25,000 years to traverse the distance from them to us)
and the width of the field is about 13.3 light-years. (credit: Hubble Heritage Team (AURA/STScI/NASA))
Color and Temperature
As we learned in The Electromagnetic Spectrum section, Wien’s law relates stellar color to stellar temperature.
Blue colors dominate the visible light output of very hot stars (with much additional radiation in the
ultraviolet). On the other hand, cool stars emit most of their visible light energy at red wavelengths (with more
radiation coming off in the infrared) (Table 17.1). The color of a star therefore provides a measure of its
intrinsic or true surface temperature (apart from the effects of reddening by interstellar dust, which will be
discussed in Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space). Color does not depend on the distance to the object.
This should be familiar to you from everyday experience. The color of a traffic signal, for example, appears the
17.2 • Colors of Stars
same no matter how far away it is. If we could somehow take a star, observe it, and then move it much farther
away, its apparent brightness (magnitude) would change. But this change in brightness is the same for all
wavelengths, and so its color would remain the same.
Example Star Colors and Corresponding Approximate Temperatures
Star Color
Approximate Temperature
Example
Blue
25,000 K
Spica
White
10,000 K
Vega
Yellow
6000 K
Sun
Orange
4000 K
Aldebaran
Red
3000 K
Betelgeuse
Table 17.1
Go to this interactive simulation from the University of Colorado (https://openstax.org/l/30UofCsimstar) to
see the color of a star changing as the temperature is changed.
The hottest stars have temperatures of over 40,000 K, and the coolest stars have temperatures of about 2000
K. Our Sun’s surface temperature is about 6000 K; its peak wavelength color is a slightly greenish-yellow. In
space, the Sun would look white, shining with about equal amounts of reddish and bluish wavelengths of light.
It looks somewhat yellow as seen from Earth’s surface because our planet’s nitrogen molecules scatter some
of the shorter (i.e., blue) wavelengths out of the beams of sunlight that reach us, leaving more long
wavelength light behind. This also explains why the sky is blue: the blue sky is sunlight scattered by Earth’s
atmosphere.
Color Indices
In order to specify the exact color of a star, astronomers normally measure a star’s apparent brightness
through filters, each of which transmits only the light from a particular narrow band of wavelengths (colors). A
crude example of a filter in everyday life is a green-colored, plastic, soft drink bottle, which, when held in front
of your eyes, lets only the green colors of light through.
One commonly used set of filters in astronomy measures stellar brightness at three wavelengths
corresponding to ultraviolet, blue, and yellow light. The filters are named: U (ultraviolet), B (blue), and V
(visual, for yellow). These filters transmit light near the wavelengths of 360 nanometers (nm), 420 nm, and 540
nm, respectively. The brightness measured through each filter is usually expressed in magnitudes. The
difference between any two of these magnitudes—say, between the blue and the visual magnitudes (B–V)—is
called a color index.
By agreement among astronomers, the ultraviolet, blue, and visual magnitudes of the UBV system are
adjusted to give a color index of 0 to a star with a surface temperature of about 10,000 K, such as Vega. The
LINK TO LEARNING
17 • Analyzing Starlight
B–V color indexes of stars range from −0.4 for the bluest stars, with temperatures of about 40,000 K, to +2.0 for
the reddest stars, with temperatures of about 2000 K. The B–V index for the Sun is about +0.65. Note that, by
convention, the B–V index is always the “bluer” minus the “redder” color.
Why use a color index if it ultimately implies temperature? Because the brightness of a star through a filter is
what astronomers actually measure, and we are always more comfortable when our statements have to do
with measurable quantities.
17.3
The Spectra of Stars (and Brown Dwarfs)
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how astronomers use spectral classes to characterize stars
Explain the difference between a star and a brown dwarf
Measuring colors is only one way of analyzing starlight. Another way is to use a spectrograph to spread out
the light into a spectrum (see the Radiation and Spectra and the Astronomical Instruments chapters). In 1814,
the German physicist Joseph Fraunhofer observed that the spectrum of the Sun shows dark lines crossing a
continuous band of colors. In the 1860s, English astronomers Sir William Huggins and Lady Margaret Huggins
(Figure 17.4) succeeded in identifying some of the lines in stellar spectra as those of known elements on Earth,
showing that the same chemical elements found in the Sun and planets exist in the stars. Since then,
astronomers have worked hard to perfect experimental techniques for obtaining and measuring spectra, and
they have developed a theoretical understanding of what can be learned from spectra. Today, spectroscopic
analysis is one of the cornerstones of astronomical research.
Figure 17.4 William Huggins (1824–1910) and Margaret Huggins (1848–1915). William and Margaret Huggins were the first to
identify the lines in the spectrum of a star other than the Sun; they also took the first spectrogram, or photograph of a stellar
spectrum.
Formation of Stellar Spectra
When the spectra of different stars were first observed, astronomers found that they were not all identical.
Since the dark lines are produced by the chemical elements present in the stars, astronomers first thought
that the spectra differ from one another because stars are not all made of the same chemical elements. This
hypothesis turned out to be wrong. The primary reason that stellar spectra look different is because the stars
have different temperatures. Most stars have nearly the same composition as the Sun, with only a few
exceptions.
Hydrogen, for example, is by far the most abundant element in most stars. However, lines of hydrogen are not
seen in the spectra of the hottest and the coolest stars. In the atmospheres of the hottest stars, hydrogen
atoms are completely ionized. Because the electron and the proton are separated, ionized hydrogen cannot
produce absorption lines. (Recall from the Formation of Spectral Lines section, the lines are the result of
electrons in orbit around a nucleus changing energy levels.)
17.3 • The Spectra of Stars (and Brown Dwarfs)
In the atmospheres of the coolest stars, hydrogen atoms have their electrons attached and can switch energy
levels to produce lines. However, practically all of the hydrogen atoms are in the lowest energy state
(unexcited) in these stars and thus can absorb only those photons able to lift an electron from that first energy
level to a higher level. Photons with enough energy to do this lie in the ultraviolet part of the electromagnetic
spectrum, and there are very few ultraviolet photons in the radiation from a cool star. What this means is that
if you observe the spectrum of a very hot or very cool star with a typical telescope on the surface of Earth, the
most common element in that star, hydrogen, will show very weak spectral lines or none at all.
The hydrogen lines in the visible part of the spectrum (called Balmer lines) are strongest in stars with
intermediate temperatures—not too hot and not too cold. Calculations show that the optimum temperature
for producing visible hydrogen lines is about 10,000 K. At this temperature, an appreciable number of
hydrogen atoms are excited to the second energy level. They can then absorb additional photons, rise to stillhigher levels of excitation, and produce a dark absorption line. Similarly, every other chemical element, in each
of its possible stages of ionization, has a characteristic temperature at which it is most effective in producing
absorption lines in any particular part of the spectrum.
Classification of Stellar Spectra
Astronomers use the patterns of lines observed in stellar spectra to sort stars into a spectral class. Because a
star’s temperature determines which absorption lines are present in its spectrum, these spectral classes are a
measure of its surface temperature. There are seven standard spectral classes. From hottest to coldest, these
seven spectral classes are designated O, B, A, F, G, K, and M. Recently, astronomers have added three
additional classes for even cooler objects—L, T, and Y.
At this point, you may be looking at these letters with wonder and asking yourself why astronomers didn’t call
the spectral types A, B, C, and so on. You will see, as we tell you the history, that it’s an instance where tradition
won out over common sense.
In the 1880s, Williamina Fleming devised a system to classify stars based on the strength of hydrogen
absorption lines. Spectra with the strongest lines were classified as “A” stars, the next strongest “B,” and so on
down the alphabet to “O” stars, in which the hydrogen lines were very weak. But we saw above that hydrogen
lines alone are not a good indicator for classifying stars, since their lines disappear from the visible light
spectrum when the stars get too hot or too cold.
In the 1890s, Annie Jump Cannon revised this classification system, focusing on just a few letters from the
original system: A, B, F, G, K, M, and O. Instead of starting over, Cannon also rearranged the existing
classes—in order of decreasing temperature—into the sequence we have learned: O, B, A, F, G, K, M. As you
can read in the feature on Annie Cannon: Classifier of the Stars in this chapter, she classified around 500,000
stars over her lifetime, classifying up to three stars per minute by looking at the stellar spectra.
For a deep dive into spectral types, explore the interactive project at the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
(https://openstax.org/l/30sloandigsky) in which you can practice classifying stars yourself.
To help astronomers remember this crazy order of letters, Cannon created a mnemonic, “Oh Be A Fine Girl,
Kiss Me.” (If you prefer, you can easily substitute “Guy” for “Girl.”) Other mnemonics, which we hope will not
be relevant for you, include “Oh Brother, Astronomers Frequently Give Killer Midterms” and “Oh Boy, An F
Grade Kills Me!” With the new L, T, and Y spectral classes, the mnemonic might be expanded to “Oh Be A Fine
Girl (Guy), Kiss Me Like That, Yo!”
Each of these spectral classes, except possibly for the Y class which is still being defined, is further subdivided
LINK TO LEARNING
17 • Analyzing Starlight
into 10 subclasses designated by the numbers 0 through 9. A B0 star is the hottest type of B star; a B9 star is
the coolest type of B star and is only slightly hotter than an A0 star.
And just one more item of vocabulary: for historical reasons, astronomers call all the elements heavier than
helium metals, even though most of them do not show metallic properties. (If you are getting annoyed at the
peculiar jargon that astronomers use, just bear in mind that every field of human activity tends to develop its
own specialized vocabulary. Just try reading a credit card or social media agreement form these days without
training in law!)
Let’s take a look at some of the details of how the spectra of the stars change with temperature. (It is these
details that allowed Annie Cannon to identify the spectral types of stars as quickly as three per minute!) As
Figure 17.5 shows, in the hottest O stars (those with temperatures over 28,000 K), only lines of ionized helium
and highly ionized atoms of other elements are conspicuous. Hydrogen lines are strongest in A stars with
atmospheric temperatures of about 10,000 K. Ionized metals provide the most conspicuous lines in stars with
temperatures from 6000 to 7500 K (spectral type F). In the coolest M stars (below 3500 K), absorption bands of
titanium oxide and other molecules are very strong. By the way, the spectral class assigned to the Sun is G2.
The sequence of spectral classes is summarized in Table 17.2.
Figure 17.5 Absorption Lines in Stars of Different Temperatures. This graph shows the strengths of absorption lines of different
chemical species (atoms, ions, molecules) as we move from hot (left) to cool (right) stars. The sequence of spectral types is also
shown.
Use the Spectrum Explorer (https://openstax.org/l/30spectexpl) to see how each element’s absorption
lines change with temperature.
LINK TO LEARNING
17.3 • The Spectra of Stars (and Brown Dwarfs)
Spectral Classes for Stars
Spectral
Class
Color
Approximate
Temperature
(K)
Principal Features
Examples
O
Blue
> 30,000
Neutral and ionized helium lines, weak hydrogen
lines
10 Lacertae
B
Bluewhite
10,000–30,000
Neutral helium lines, strong hydrogen lines
Rigel, Spica
A
White
7500–10,000
Strongest hydrogen lines, weak ionized calcium
lines, weak ionized metal (e.g., iron, magnesium)
lines
Sirius, Vega
F
Yellowwhite
6000–7500
Strong hydrogen lines, strong ionized calcium
lines, weak sodium lines, many ionized metal lines
Canopus,
Procyon
G
Yellow
5200–6000
Weaker hydrogen lines, strong ionized calcium
lines, strong sodium lines, many lines of ionized
and neutral metals
Sun,
Capella
K
Orange
3700–5200
Very weak hydrogen lines, strong ionized calcium
lines, strong sodium lines, many lines of neutral
metals
Arcturus,
Aldebaran
M
Red
2400–3700
Strong lines of neutral metals and molecular bands
of titanium oxide dominate
Betelgeuse,
Antares
L
Red
1300–2400
Metal hydride lines, alkali metal lines (e.g., sodium,
potassium, rubidium)
Teide 1
T
Magenta
700–1300
Methane lines
Gliese 229B
Y
Infrared1
< 700
Ammonia lines
WISE
1828+2650
Table 17.2
To see how spectral classification works, let’s use Figure 17.5. Suppose you have a spectrum in which the
hydrogen lines are about half as strong as those seen in an A star. Looking at the lines in our figure, you see
that the star could be either a B star or a G star. But if the spectrum also contains helium lines, then it is a B
star, whereas if it contains lines of ionized iron and other metals, it must be a G star.
If you look at Figure 17.6, you can see that you, too, could assign a spectral class to a star whose type was not
already known. All you have to do is match the pattern of spectral lines to a standard star (like the ones shown
in the figure) whose type has already been determined.
Absorption by sodium and potassium atoms makes Y dwarfs appear a bit less red than L dwarfs.
17 • Analyzing Starlight
Figure 17.6 Spectra of Stars with Different Spectral Classes. This image compares the spectra of the different spectral classes. The
spectral class assigned to each of these stellar spectra is listed at the left of the picture. The strongest four lines seen at spectral type
A1 (one in the red, one in the blue-green, and two in the blue) are Balmer lines of hydrogen. Note how these lines weaken at both
higher and lower temperatures, as Figure 17.5 also indicates. The strong pair of closely spaced lines in the yellow in the cool stars is
due to neutral sodium (one of the neutral metals in Figure 17.5). (Credit: modification of work by NOAO/AURA/NSF)
Both colors and spectral classes can be used to estimate the temperature of a star. Spectra are harder to
measure because the light has to be bright enough to be spread out into all colors of the rainbow, and
detectors must be sensitive enough to respond to individual wavelengths. In order to measure colors, the
detectors need only respond to the many wavelengths that pass simultaneously through the colored filters
that have been chosen—that is, to all the blue light or all the yellow-green light.
Annie Cannon: Classifier of the Stars
Annie Jump Cannon was born in Delaware in 1863 (Figure 17.7). In 1880, she went to Wellesley College, one
of the new breed of US colleges opening up to educate young women. Wellesley, only 5 years old at the
time, had the second student physics lab in the country and provided excellent training in basic science.
After college, Cannon spent a decade with her parents but was very dissatisfied, longing to do scientific
work. After her mother’s death in 1893, she returned to Wellesley as a teaching assistant and also to take
courses at Radcliffe, the women’s college associated with Harvard.
Figure 17.7 Annie Jump Cannon (1863–1941). Cannon is well-known for her classifications of stellar spectra. (credit: modification
of work by Smithsonian Institution)
In the late 1800s, the director of the Harvard Observatory, Edward C. Pickering, needed lots of help with his
ambitious program of classifying stellar spectra. The basis for these studies was a monumental collection of
nearly a million photographic spectra of stars, obtained from many years of observations made at Harvard
College Observatory in Massachusetts as well as at its remote observing stations in South America and
South Africa. Pickering quickly discovered that educated young women could be hired as assistants for onethird or one-fourth the salary paid to men, and they would often put up with working conditions and
repetitive tasks that men with the same education would not tolerate. These women became known as the
VOYAGERS IN ASTRONOMY
17.3 • The Spectra of Stars (and Brown Dwarfs)
Harvard Computers. (We should emphasize that astronomers were not alone in reaching such conclusions
about the relatively new idea of upper-class, educated women working outside the home: women were
exploited and undervalued in many fields. This is a legacy from which our society is just beginning to
emerge.)
Cannon was hired by Pickering as one of the “computers” to help with the classification of spectra. She
became so good at it that she could visually examine and determine the spectral types of several hundred
stars per hour (dictating her conclusions to an assistant). She made many discoveries while investigating
the Harvard photographic plates, including 300 variable stars (stars whose luminosity changes periodically).
But her main legacy is a marvelous catalog of spectral types for hundreds of thousands of stars, which
served as a foundation for much of twentieth-century astronomy.
In 1911, a visiting committee of astronomers reported that “she is the one person in the world who can do
this work quickly and accurately” and urged Harvard to give Cannon an official appointment in keeping
with her skill and renown. Not until 1938, however, did Harvard appoint her an astronomer at the
university; she was then 75 years old.
Cannon received the first honorary degree Oxford awarded to a woman, and she became the first woman
to be elected an officer of the American Astronomical Society, the main professional organization of
astronomers in the US. She generously donated the money from one of the major prizes she had won to
found a special award for women in astronomy, now known as the Annie Jump Cannon Prize. True to form,
she continued classifying stellar spectra almost to the very end of her life in 1941.
Spectral Classes L, T, and Y
The scheme devised by Cannon worked well until 1988, when astronomers began to discover objects even
cooler than M9-type stars. We use the word object because many of the new discoveries are not true stars. A
star is defined as an object that during some part of its lifetime derives 100% of its energy from the same
process that makes the Sun shine—the fusion of hydrogen nuclei (protons) into helium. Objects with masses
less than about 7.5% of the mass of our Sun (about 0.075 MSun) do not become hot enough for hydrogen
fusion to take place. Even before the first such “failed star” was found, this class of objects, with masses
intermediate between stars and planets, was given the name brown dwarfs.
Brown dwarfs are very difficult to observe because they are extremely faint and cool, and they put out most of
their light in the infrared part of the spectrum. It was only after the construction of very large telescopes, like
the Keck telescopes in Hawaii, and the development of very sensitive infrared detectors, that the search for
brown dwarfs succeeded. The first brown dwarf was discovered in 1988, and, as of the summer of 2015, there
are more than 2200 known brown dwarfs.
Initially, brown dwarfs were given spectral classes like M10+ or “much cooler than M9,” but so many are now
known that it is possible to begin assigning spectral types. The hottest brown dwarfs are given types L0–L9
(temperatures in the range 2400–1300 K), whereas still cooler (1300–700 K) objects are given types T0–T9 (see
Figure 17.8). In class L brown dwarfs, the lines of titanium oxide, which are strong in M stars, have
disappeared. This is because the L dwarfs are so cool that atoms and molecules can gather together into dust
particles in their atmospheres; the titanium is locked up in the dust grains rather than being available to form
molecules of titanium oxide. Lines of steam (hot water vapor) are present, along with lines of carbon
monoxide and neutral sodium, potassium, cesium, and rubidium. Methane (CH4) lines are strong in class-T
brown dwarfs, as methane exists in the atmosphere of the giant planets in our own solar system.
17 • Analyzing Starlight
In 2009, astronomers discovered ultra-cool brown dwarfs with temperatures of 500–600 K. These objects
exhibited absorption lines due to ammonia (NH3), which are not seen in T dwarfs. A new spectral class, Y, was
created for these objects. As of 2021, over 50 brown dwarfs belonging to spectral class Y have been discovered,
some with temperatures comparable to that of the human body (about 300 K).2
Figure 17.8 Brown Dwarfs. This illustration shows the sizes and surface temperatures of brown dwarfs Teide 1, Gliese 229B, and
WISE1828 in relation to the Sun, a red dwarf star (Gliese 229A), and Jupiter. (credit: modification of work by MPIA/V. Joergens)
Most brown dwarfs start out with atmospheric temperatures and spectra like those of true stars with spectral
classes of M6.5 and later, even though the brown dwarfs are not hot and dense enough in their interiors to
fuse hydrogen. In fact, the spectra of brown dwarfs and true stars are so similar from spectral types late M
through L that it is not possible to distinguish the two types of objects based on spectra alone. An independent
measure of mass is required to determine whether a specific object is a brown dwarf or a very low mass star.
Since brown dwarfs cool steadily throughout their lifetimes, the spectral type of a given brown dwarf changes
with time over a billion years or more from late M through L, T, and Y spectral types.
Low-Mass Brown Dwarfs vs. High-Mass Planets
An interesting property of brown dwarfs is that they are all about the same radius as Jupiter, regardless of
their masses. Amazingly, this covers a range of masses from about 13 to 80 times the mass of Jupiter (MJ). This
can make distinguishing a low-mass brown dwarf from a high-mass planet very difficult.
So, what is the difference between a low-mass brown dwarf and a high-mass planet? The International
Astronomical Union considers the distinctive feature to be deuterium fusion. Although brown dwarfs do not
sustain regular (proton-proton) hydrogen fusion, they are capable of fusing deuterium (a rare form of
hydrogen with one proton and one neutron in its nucleus). The fusion of deuterium can happen at a lower
temperature than the fusion of hydrogen. If an object has enough mass to fuse deuterium (about 13 MJ or
The record-holder for the coldest Type Y dwarf is WISE 0855-0714, at around 250 K.
17.3 • The Spectra of Stars (and Brown Dwarfs)
0.012 MSun), it is a brown dwarf. Objects with less than 13 MJ do not fuse deuterium and are usually considered
planets.
17.4
Using Spectra to Measure Stellar Radius, Composition, and Motion
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Understand how astronomers can learn about a star’s radius and composition by studying its spectrum
Explain how astronomers can measure the motion and rotation of a star using the Doppler effect
Describe the proper motion of a star and how it relates to a star’s space velocity
Analyzing the spectrum of a star can teach us all kinds of things in addition to its temperature. We can
measure its detailed chemical composition as well as the pressure in its atmosphere. From the pressure, we
get clues about its size. We can also measure its motion toward or away from us and estimate its rotation.
Clues to the Size of a Star
As we shall see in The Stars: A Celestial Census, stars come in a wide variety of sizes. At some periods in their
lives, stars can expand to enormous dimensions. Stars of such exaggerated size are called giants. Luckily for
the astronomer, stellar spectra can be used to distinguish giants from run-of-the-mill stars (such as our Sun).
Suppose you want to determine whether a star is a giant. A giant star has a large, extended photosphere.
Because it is so large, a giant star’s atoms are spread over a great volume, which means that the density of
particles in the star’s photosphere is low. As a result, the pressure in a giant star’s photosphere is also low.
This low pressure affects the spectrum in two ways. First, a star with a lower-pressure photosphere shows
narrower spectral lines than a star of the same temperature with a higher-pressure photosphere (Figure 17.9).
The difference is large enough that careful study of spectra can tell which of two stars at the same
temperature has a higher pressure (and is thus more compressed) and which has a lower pressure (and thus
must be extended). This effect is due to collisions between particles in the star’s photosphere—more collisions
lead to broader spectral lines. Collisions will, of course, be more frequent in a higher-density environment.
Think about it like traffic—collisions are much more likely during rush hour, when the density of cars is high.
Second, more atoms are ionized in a giant star than in a star like the Sun with the same temperature. The
ionization of atoms in a star’s outer layers is caused mainly by photons, and the amount of energy carried by
photons is determined by temperature. But how long atoms stay ionized depends in part on pressure.
Compared with what happens in the Sun (with its relatively dense photosphere), ionized atoms in a giant star’s
photosphere are less likely to pass close enough to electrons to interact and combine with one or more of
them, thereby becoming neutral again. Ionized atoms, as we discussed earlier, have different spectra from
atoms that are neutral.
17 • Analyzing Starlight
Figure 17.9 Spectral Lines. This figure illustrates one difference in the spectral lines from stars of the same temperature but
different pressures. A giant star with a very-low-pressure photosphere shows very narrow spectral lines (bottom), whereas a smaller
star with a higher-pressure photosphere shows much broader spectral lines (top). (credit: modification of work by NASA, ESA, A.
Field, and J. Kalirai (STScI))
Abundances of the Elements
Absorption lines of a majority of the known chemical elements have now been identified in the spectra of the
Sun and stars. If we see lines of iron in a star’s spectrum, for example, then we know immediately that the star
must contain iron.
Note that the absence of an element’s spectral lines does not necessarily mean that the element itself is
absent. As we saw, the temperature and pressure in a star’s atmosphere will determine what types of atoms
are able to produce absorption lines. Only if the physical conditions in a star’s photosphere are such that lines
of an element should (according to calculations) be there can we conclude that the absence of observable
spectral lines implies low abundance of the element.
Suppose two stars have identical temperatures and pressures, but the lines of, say, sodium are stronger in one
than in the other. Stronger lines mean that there are more atoms in the stellar photosphere absorbing light.
Therefore, we know immediately that the star with stronger sodium lines contains more sodium. Complex
calculations are required to determine exactly how much more, but those calculations can be done for any
element observed in any star with any temperature and pressure.
Of course, astronomy textbooks such as ours always make these things sound a bit easier than they really are.
If you look at the stellar spectra such as those in Figure 17.6, you may get some feeling for how hard it is to
decode all of the information contained in the thousands of absorption lines. First of all, it has taken many
years of careful laboratory work on Earth to determine the precise wavelengths at which hot gases of each
element have their spectral lines. Long books and computer databases have been compiled to show the lines
of each element that can be seen at each temperature. Second, stellar spectra usually have many lines from a
number of elements, and we must be careful to sort them out correctly. Sometimes nature is unhelpful, and
lines of different elements have identical wavelengths, thereby adding to the confusion. And third, as we saw
in the chapter on Radiation and Spectra, the motion of the star can change the observed wavelength of each
of the lines. So, the observed wavelengths may not match laboratory measurements exactly. In practice,
analyzing stellar spectra is a demanding, sometimes frustrating task that requires both training and skill.
Studies of stellar spectra have shown that hydrogen makes up about three-quarters of the mass of most stars.
Helium is the second-most abundant element, making up almost a quarter of a star’s mass. Together,
hydrogen and helium make up from 96 to 99% of the mass; in some stars, they amount to more than 99.9%.
Among the 4% or less of “heavy elements,” oxygen, carbon, neon, iron, nitrogen, silicon, magnesium, and
sulfur are among the most abundant. Generally, but not invariably, the elements of lower atomic weight are
more abundant than those of higher atomic weight.
17.4 • Using Spectra to Measure Stellar Radius, Composition, and Motion
Take a careful look at the list of elements in the preceding paragraph. Two of the most abundant are hydrogen
and oxygen (which make up water); add carbon and nitrogen and you are starting to write the prescription for
the chemistry of an astronomy student. We are made of elements that are common in the universe—just
mixed together in a far more sophisticated form (and a much cooler environment) than in a star.
As we mentioned in The Spectra of Stars (and Brown Dwarfs) section, astronomers use the term “metals” to
refer to all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium. The fraction of a star’s mass that is composed of
these elements is referred to as the star’s metallicity. The metallicity of the Sun, for example, is 0.02, since 2%
of the Sun’s mass is made of elements heavier than helium.
Appendix K lists how common each element is in the universe (compared to hydrogen); these estimates are
based primarily on investigation of the Sun, which is a typical star. Some very rare elements, however, have
not been detected in the Sun. Estimates of the amounts of these elements in the universe are based on
laboratory measurements of their abundance in primitive meteorites, which are considered representative of
unaltered material condensed from the solar nebula (see the Cosmic Samples and the Origin of the Solar
System chapter).
Radial Velocity
When we measure the spectrum of a star, we determine the wavelength of each of its lines. If the star is not
moving with respect to the Sun, then the wavelength corresponding to each element will be the same as those
we measure in a laboratory here on Earth. But if stars are moving toward or away from us, we must consider
the Doppler effect (see The Doppler Effect section). We should see all the spectral lines of moving stars shifted
toward the red end of the spectrum if the star is moving away from us, or toward the blue (violet) end if it is
moving toward us (Figure 17.10). The greater the shift, the faster the star is moving. Such motion, along the
line of sight between the star and the observer, is called radial velocity and is usually measured in kilometers
per second.
Figure 17.10 Doppler-Shifted Stars. When the spectral lines of a moving star shift toward the red end of the spectrum, we know
that the star is moving away from us. If they shift toward the blue end, the star is moving toward us.
William Huggins, pioneering yet again, in 1868 made the first radial velocity determination of a star. He
observed the Doppler shift in one of the hydrogen lines in the spectrum of Sirius and found that this star is
moving toward the solar system. (Better measurements now indicate that Sirius is actually moving away, but
Huggins is still celebrated as a pioneer in making such measurements.) Today, radial velocity can be measured
for any star bright enough for its spectrum to be observed. As we will see in The Stars: A Celestial Census,
radial velocity measurements of double stars are crucial in deriving stellar masses.
17 • Analyzing Starlight
In the Spectrum Constructor (https://openstax.org/l/30spectconst), you can add absorption lines to the
spectrum. Then adjust the velocity; negative indicates the star is moving toward the observer, and positive
indicates it is moving away. Explore how the absorption lines are seen to shift to shorter and longer
wavelengths.
Proper Motion
There is another type of motion stars can have that cannot be detected with stellar spectra. Unlike radial
motion, which is along our line of sight (i.e., toward or away from Earth), this motion, called proper motion, is
transverse: that is, across our line of sight. We see it as a change in the relative positions of the stars on the
celestial sphere (Figure 17.11). These changes are very slow. Even the star with the largest proper motion takes
200 years to change its position in the sky by an amount equal to the width of the full Moon, and the motions
of other stars are smaller yet.
Figure 17.11 Large Proper Motion. Three photographs of Barnard’s star, the star with the largest known proper motion, show how
this faint star has moved over a period of 20 years. (modification of work by Steve Quirk)
For this reason, with our naked eyes, we do not notice any change in the positions of the bright stars during
the course of a human lifetime. If we could live long enough, however, the changes would become obvious.
For example, some 50,000 years from now, terrestrial observers will find the handle of the Big Dipper
unmistakably more bent than it is now (Figure 17.12).
LINK TO LEARNING
17.4 • Using Spectra to Measure Stellar Radius, Composition, and Motion
Figure 17.12 Changes in the Big Dipper. This figure shows changes in the appearance of the Big Dipper due to proper motion of
the stars over 100,000 years.
We measure the proper motion of a star in arcseconds (1/3600 of a degree) per year. That is, the
measurement of proper motion tells us only by how much of an angle a star has changed its position on the
celestial sphere. If two stars at different distances are moving at the same velocity perpendicular to our line of
sight, the closer one will show a larger shift in its position on the celestial sphere in a year’s time. As an
analogy, imagine you are standing at the side of a freeway. Cars will appear to whiz past you. If you then watch
the traffic from a vantage point half a mile away, the cars will move much more slowly across your field of
vision. In order to convert this angular motion to a velocity, we need to know how far away the star is.
To know the true space velocity of a star—that is, its total speed and the direction in which it is moving
through space relative to the Sun—we must know its radial velocity, proper motion, and distance (Figure
17.13). A star’s space velocity can also, over time, cause its distance from the Sun to change significantly. Over
several hundred thousand years, these changes can be large enough to affect the apparent brightnesses of
nearby stars. Today, Sirius, in the constellation Canis Major (the Big Dog) is the brightest star in the sky, but
100,000 years ago, the star Canopus in the constellation Carina (the Keel) was the brightest one. A little over
200,000 years from now, Sirius will have moved away and faded somewhat, and Vega, the bright blue star in
Lyra, will take over its place of honor as the brightest star in Earth’s skies.
17 • Analyzing Starlight
Figure 17.13 Space Velocity and Proper Motion. This figure shows the true space velocity of a star. The radial velocity is the
component of the space velocity projected along the line of sight from the Sun to a star. The transverse velocity is a component of
the space velocity projected on the sky. What astronomers measure is proper motion (μ), which is the change in the apparent
direction on the sky measured in fractions of a degree. To convert this change in direction to a speed in, say, kilometers per second,
it is necessary to also know the distance (d) from the Sun to the star.
Rotation
We can also use the Doppler effect to measure how fast a star rotates. If an object is rotating, then one of its
sides is approaching us while the other is receding (unless its axis of rotation happens to be pointed exactly
toward us). This is clearly the case for the Sun or a planet; we can observe the light from either the
approaching or receding edge of these nearby objects and directly measure the Doppler shifts that arise from
the rotation.
Stars, however, are so far away that they all appear as unresolved points. The best we can do is to analyze the
light from the entire star at once. Due to the Doppler effect, the lines in the light that come from the side of
the star rotating toward us are shifted to shorter wavelengths and the lines in the light from the opposite edge
of the star are shifted to longer wavelengths. You can think of each spectral line that we observe as the sum or
composite of spectral lines originating from different speeds with respect to us. Each point on the star has its
own Doppler shift, so the absorption line we see from the whole star is actually much wider than it would be if
the star were not rotating. If a star is rotating rapidly, there will be a greater spread of Doppler shifts and all its
spectral lines should be quite broad. In fact, astronomers call this effect line broadening, and the amount of
broadening can tell us the speed at which the star rotates (Figure 17.14).
17.4 • Using Spectra to Measure Stellar Radius, Composition, and Motion
Figure 17.14 Using a Spectrum to Determine Stellar Rotation. A rotating star will show broader spectral lines than a nonrotating
star.
Measurements of the widths of spectral lines show that many stars rotate faster than the Sun, some with
periods of less than a day! These rapid rotators spin so fast that their shapes are “flattened” into what we call
oblate spheroids. An example of this is the star Vega, which rotates once every 12.5 hours. Vega’s rotation
flattens its shape so much that its diameter at the equator is 23% wider than its diameter at the poles (Figure
17.15). The Sun, with its rotation period of about a month, rotates rather slowly. Studies have shown that stars
decrease their rotational speed as they age. Young stars rotate very quickly, with rotational periods of days or
less. Very old stars can have rotation periods of several months.
17 • Analyzing Starlight
Figure 17.15 Comparison of Rotating Stars. This illustration compares the more rapidly rotating star Altair to the slower rotating
Sun.
As you can see, spectroscopy is an extremely powerful technique that helps us learn all kinds of information
about stars that we simply could not gather any other way. We will see in later chapters that these same
techniques can also teach us about galaxies, which are the most distant objects that can we observe. Without
spectroscopy, we would know next to nothing about the universe beyond the solar system.
Astronomy and Philanthropy
Throughout the history of astronomy, contributions from wealthy patrons of the science have made an
enormous difference in building new instruments and carrying out long-term research projects. Edward
Pickering’s stellar classification project, which was to stretch over several decades, was made possible by
major donations from Anna Draper. She was the widow of Henry Draper, a physician who was one of the
most accomplished amateur astronomers of the nineteenth century and the first person to successfully
photograph the spectrum of a star. Anna Draper gave several hundred thousand dollars to Harvard
Observatory. As a result, the great spectroscopic survey is still known as the Henry Draper Memorial, and
many stars are still referred to by their “HD” numbers in that catalog (such as HD 209458).
In the 1870s, the eccentric piano builder and real estate magnate James Lick (Figure 17.16) decided to leave
some of his fortune to build the world’s largest telescope. When, in 1887, the pier to house the telescope
was finished, Lick’s body was entombed in it. Atop the foundation rose a 36-inch refractor, which for many
years was the main instrument at the Lick Observatory near San Jose.
MAKING CONNECTIONS
17.4 • Using Spectra to Measure Stellar Radius, Composition, and Motion
Figure 17.16 Henry Draper (1837–1882) and James Lick (1796–1876). (a) Draper stands next to a telescope used for
photography. After his death, his widow funded further astronomy work in his name. (b) Lick was a philanthropist who provided
funds to build a 36-inch refractor not only as a memorial to himself but also to aid in further astronomical research.
The Lick telescope remained the largest in the world until 1897, when George Ellery Hale persuaded
railroad millionaire Charles Yerkes to finance the construction of a 40-inch telescope near Chicago. More
recently, Howard Keck, whose family made its fortune in the oil industry, gave $70 million from his family
foundation to the California Institute of Technology to help build the world’s largest telescope atop the
14,000-foot peak of Maunakea in Hawaii (see the chapter on Astronomical Instruments to learn more about
these telescopes). The Keck Foundation was so pleased with what is now called the Keck telescope that they
gave $74 million more to build Keck II, another 10-meter reflector on the same volcanic peak.
Now, if any of you become millionaires or billionaires, and astronomy has sparked your interest, do keep an
astronomical instrument or project in mind as you plan your estate. But frankly, private philanthropy could
not possibly support the full enterprise of scientific research in astronomy. Much of our exploration of the
universe is financed by federal agencies such as the National Science Foundation and NASA in the United
States, and by similar government agencies in the other countries. In this way, all of us, through a very
small share of our tax dollars, are philanthropists for astronomy.
17 • Analyzing Starlight
Key Terms
apparent brightness
a measure of the amount of light received by Earth from a star or other object—that is,
how bright an object appears in the sky, as contrasted with its luminosity
brown dwarf
an object intermediate in size between a planet and a star; the approximate mass range is
from about 1/100 of the mass of the Sun up to the lower mass limit for self-sustaining nuclear reactions,
which is about 0.075 the mass of the Sun; brown dwarfs are capable of deuterium fusion, but not hydrogen
fusion
color index
difference between the magnitudes of a star or other object measured in light of two different
spectral regions—for example, blue minus visual (B–V) magnitudes
giant
a star of exaggerated size with a large, extended photosphere
luminosity
the rate at which a star or other object emits electromagnetic energy into space; the total power
output of an object
magnitude
an older system of measuring the amount of light we receive from a star or other luminous
object; the larger the magnitude, the less radiation we receive from the object
proper motion
the angular change per year in the direction of a star as seen from the Sun
radial velocity
motion toward or away from the observer; the component of relative velocity that lies in the
line of sight
space velocity
the total (three-dimensional) speed and direction with which an object is moving through
space relative to the Sun
spectral class
(or spectral type) the classification of stars according to their temperatures using the
characteristics of their spectra; the types are O, B, A, F, G, K, and M with L, T, and Y added recently for cooler
star-like objects that recent survey have revealed
Summary
17.1 The Brightness of Stars
The total energy emitted per second by a star is called its luminosity. How bright a star looks from the
perspective of Earth is its apparent brightness. The apparent brightness of a star depends on both its
luminosity and its distance from Earth. Thus, the determination of apparent brightness and measurement of
the distance to a star provide enough information to calculate its luminosity. The apparent brightnesses of
stars are often expressed in terms of magnitudes, which is an old system based on how human vision
interprets relative light intensity.
17.2 Colors of Stars
Stars have different colors, which are indicators of temperature. The hottest stars tend to appear blue or bluewhite, whereas the coolest stars are red. A color index of a star is the difference in the magnitudes measured
at any two wavelengths and is one way that astronomers measure and express the temperature of stars.
17.3 The Spectra of Stars (and Brown Dwarfs)
The differences in the spectra of stars are principally due to differences in temperature, not composition. The
spectra of stars are described in terms of spectral classes. In order of decreasing temperature, these spectral
classes are O, B, A, F, G, K, M, L, T, and Y. These are further divided into subclasses numbered from 0 to 9. The
classes L, T, and Y have been added recently to describe newly discovered star-like objects—mainly brown
dwarfs—that are cooler than M9. Our Sun has spectral type G2.
17.4 Using Spectra to Measure Stellar Radius, Composition, and Motion
Spectra of stars of the same temperature but different atmospheric pressures have subtle differences, so
spectra can be used to determine whether a star has a large radius and low atmospheric pressure (a giant
star) or a small radius and high atmospheric pressure. Stellar spectra can also be used to determine the
17 • Key Terms
chemical composition of stars; hydrogen and helium make up most of the mass of all stars. Measurements of
line shifts produced by the Doppler effect indicate the radial velocity of a star. Broadening of spectral lines by
the Doppler effect is a measure of rotational velocity. A star can also show proper motion, due to the
component of a star’s space velocity across the line of sight.
For Further Exploration
Articles
Berman, B. “Magnitude Cum Laude.” Astronomy (December 1998): 92. How we measure the apparent
brightnesses of stars is discussed.
Dvorak, J. “The Women Who Created Modern Astronomy [including Annie Cannon].” Sky & Telescope (August
2013): 28.
Hearnshaw, J. “Origins of the Stellar Magnitude Scale.” Sky & Telescope (November 1992): 494. A good history
of how we have come to have this cumbersome system is discussed.
Hirshfeld, A. “The Absolute Magnitude of Stars.” Sky & Telescope (September 1994): 35.
Kaler, J. “Stars in the Cellar: Classes Lost and Found.” Sky & Telescope (September 2000): 39. An introduction is
provided for spectral types and the new classes L and T.
Kaler, J. “Origins of the Spectral Sequence.” Sky & Telescope (February 1986): 129.
Skrutskie, M. “2MASS: Unveiling the Infrared Universe.” Sky & Telescope (July 2001): 34. This article focuses on
an all-sky survey at 2 microns.
Sneden, C. “Reading the Colors of the Stars.” Astronomy (April 1989): 36. This article includes a discussion of
what we learn from spectroscopy.
Steffey, P. “The Truth about Star Colors.” Sky & Telescope (September 1992): 266. The color index and how the
eye and film “see” colors are discussed.
Tomkins, J. “Once and Future Celestial Kings.” Sky & Telescope (April 1989): 59. Calculating the motion of stars
and determining which stars were, are, and will be brightest in the sky are discussed.
Websites
Discovery of Brown Dwarfs: http://w.astro.berkeley.edu/~basri/bdwarfs/SciAm-book.pdf
(http://w.astro.berkeley.edu/~basri/bdwarfs/SciAm-book.pdf).
Listing of Nearby Brown Dwarfs: http://www.solstation.com/stars/pc10bd.htm (http://www.solstation.com/
stars/pc10bd.htm).
Spectral Types of Stars: http://www.skyandtelescope.com/astronomy-equipment/the-spectral-types-of-stars/
(http://www.skyandtelescope.com/astronomy-equipment/the-spectral-types-of-stars/).
Stellar Velocities https://www.e-education.psu.edu/astro801/content/l4_p7.html (https://www.eeducation.psu.edu/astro801/content/l4_p7.html).
The Lick Observatory: https://www.ucolick.org/main/index.html (https://www.ucolick.org/main/index.html)
Unheard Voices! The Contributions of Women to Astronomy: A Resource Guide: http://bit.ly/astronomywomen
(http://bit.ly/astronomywomen).
Videos
When You Are Just Too Small to be a Star: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zXCDsb4n4KU
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zXCDsb4n4KU). 2013 Public Talk on Brown Dwarfs and Planets by Dr.
17 • For Further Exploration
Gibor Basri of the University of California–Berkeley (1:32:52).
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
The Voyagers in Astronomy feature on Annie Cannon: Classifier of the Stars discusses some of the
difficulties women who wanted to do astronomy faced in the first half of the twentieth century. What does
your group think about the situation for women today? Do men and women have an equal chance to
become scientists? Discuss with your group whether, in your experience, boys and girls were equally
encouraged to do science and math where you went to school.
B.
In the section on magnitudes in The Brightness of Stars, we discussed how this old system of classifying
how bright different stars appear to the eye first developed. Your authors complained about the fact that
this old system still has to be taught to every generation of new students. Can your group think of any
other traditional systems of doing things in science and measurement where tradition rules even though
common sense says a better system could certainly be found. Explain. (Hint: Try Daylight Savings Time, or
metric versus English units.)
C.
Suppose you could observe a star that has only one spectral line. Could you tell what element that spectral
line comes from? Make a list of reasons with your group about why you answered yes or no.
D.
A wealthy alumnus of your college decides to give $50 million to the astronomy department to build a
world-class observatory for learning more about the characteristics of stars. Have your group discuss what
kind of equipment they would put in the observatory. Where should this observatory be located? Justify
your answers. (You may want to refer back to the Astronomical Instruments chapter and to revisit this
question as you learn more about the stars and equipment for observing them in future chapters.)
E.
For some astronomers, introducing a new spectral type for the stars (like the types L, T, and Y discussed in
the text) is similar to introducing a new area code for telephone calls. No one likes to disrupt the old
system, but sometimes it is simply necessary. Have your group make a list of steps an astronomer would
have to go through to persuade colleagues that a new spectral class is needed.
Exercises
Review Questions
1. What two factors determine how bright a star appears to be in the sky?
2. Explain why color is a measure of a star’s temperature.
3. What is the main reason that the spectra of all stars are not identical? Explain.
4. What elements are stars mostly made of? How do we know this?
5. What did Annie Cannon contribute to the understanding of stellar spectra?
6. Name five characteristics of a star that can be determined by measuring its spectrum. Explain how you
would use a spectrum to determine these characteristics.
7. How do objects of spectral types L, T, and Y differ from those of the other spectral types?
8. Do stars that look brighter in the sky have larger or smaller magnitudes than fainter stars?
9. The star Antares has an apparent magnitude of 1.0, whereas the star Procyon has an apparent magnitude
of 0.4. Which star appears brighter in the sky?
10. Based on their colors, which of the following stars is hottest? Which is coolest? Archenar (blue),
Betelgeuse (red), Capella (yellow).
17 • Collaborative Group Activities
11. Order the seven basic spectral types from hottest to coldest.
12. What is the defining difference between a brown dwarf and a true star?
Thought Questions
13. If the star Sirius emits 23 times more energy than the Sun, why does the Sun appear brighter in the sky?
14. How would two stars of equal luminosity—one blue and the other red—appear in an image taken through
a filter that passes mainly blue light? How would their appearance change in an image taken through a
filter that transmits mainly red light?
15. Table 17.2 lists the temperature ranges that correspond to the different spectral types. What part of the
star do these temperatures refer to? Why?
16. Suppose you are given the task of measuring the colors of the brightest stars, listed in Appendix J, through
three filters: the first transmits blue light, the second transmits yellow light, and the third transmits red
light. If you observe the star Vega, it will appear equally bright through each of the three filters. Which
stars will appear brighter through the blue filter than through the red filter? Which stars will appear
brighter through the red filter? Which star is likely to have colors most nearly like those of Vega?
17. Star X has lines of ionized helium in its spectrum, and star Y has bands of titanium oxide. Which is hotter?
Why? The spectrum of star Z shows lines of ionized helium and also molecular bands of titanium oxide.
What is strange about this spectrum? Can you suggest an explanation?
18. The spectrum of the Sun has hundreds of strong lines of nonionized iron but only a few, very weak lines of
helium. A star of spectral type B has very strong lines of helium but very weak iron lines. Do these
differences mean that the Sun contains more iron and less helium than the B star? Explain.
19. What are the approximate spectral classes of stars with the following characteristics?
A.
Balmer lines of hydrogen are very strong; some lines of ionized metals are present.
B.
The strongest lines are those of ionized helium.
C.
Lines of ionized calcium are the strongest in the spectrum; hydrogen lines show only moderate strength;
lines of neutral and metals are present.
D.
The strongest lines are those of neutral metals and bands of titanium oxide.
20. Look at the chemical elements in Appendix K. Can you identify any relationship between the abundance of
an element and its atomic weight? Are there any obvious exceptions to this relationship?
21. Appendix I lists some of the nearest stars. Are most of these stars hotter or cooler than the Sun? Do any of
them emit more energy than the Sun? If so, which ones?
22. Appendix J lists the stars that appear brightest in our sky. Are most of these hotter or cooler than the Sun?
Can you suggest a reason for the difference between this answer and the answer to the previous
question? (Hint: Look at the luminosities.) Is there any tendency for a correlation between temperature
and luminosity? Are there exceptions to the correlation?
23. What star appears the brightest in the sky (other than the Sun)? The second brightest? What color is
Betelgeuse? Use Appendix J to find the answers.
24. Suppose hominids one million years ago had left behind maps of the night sky. Would these maps
represent accurately the sky that we see today? Why or why not?
25. Why can only a lower limit to the rate of stellar rotation be determined from line broadening rather than
the actual rotation rate? (Refer to Figure 17.14.)
26. Why do you think astronomers have suggested three different spectral types (L, T, and Y) for the brown
dwarfs instead of M? Why was one not enough?
17 • Exercises
27. Sam, a college student, just bought a new car. Sam’s friend Adam, a graduate student in astronomy, asks
Sam for a ride. In the car, Adam remarks that the colors on the temperature control are wrong. Why did
he say that?
Figure 17.17 (credit: modification of work by Michael Sheehan)
28. Would a red star have a smaller or larger magnitude in a red filter than in a blue filter?
29. Two stars have proper motions of one arcsecond per year. Star A is 20 light-years from Earth, and Star B is
10 light-years away from Earth. Which one has the faster velocity in space?
30. Suppose there are three stars in space, each moving at 100 km/s. Star A is moving across (i.e.,
perpendicular to) our line of sight, Star B is moving directly away from Earth, and Star C is moving away
from Earth, but at a 30° angle to the line of sight. From which star will you observe the greatest Doppler
shift? From which star will you observe the smallest Doppler shift?
31. What would you say to a friend who made this statement, “The visible-light spectrum of the Sun shows
weak hydrogen lines and strong calcium lines. The Sun must therefore contain more calcium than
hydrogen.”?
Figuring for Yourself
32. In Appendix J, how much more luminous is the most luminous of the stars than the least luminous?
For Exercise 17.33 through Exercise 17.38, use the equations relating magnitude and apparent brightness
given in the section on the magnitude scale in The Brightness of Stars and Example 17.1.
33. Verify that if two stars have a difference of five magnitudes, this corresponds to a factor of 100 in the ratio
that 2.5 magnitudes corresponds to a factor of 10; and that 0.75 magnitudes corresponds to a
factor of 2.
34. As seen from Earth, the Sun has an apparent magnitude of about −26.7. What is the apparent magnitude
of the Sun as seen from Saturn, about 10 AU away? (Remember that one AU is the distance from Earth to
the Sun and that the brightness decreases as the inverse square of the distance.) Would the Sun still be
the brightest star in the sky?
35. An astronomer is investigating a faint star that has recently been discovered in very sensitive surveys of
the sky. The star has a magnitude of 16. How much less bright is it than Antares, a star with magnitude
roughly equal to 1?
36. The center of a faint but active galaxy has magnitude 26. How much less bright does it look than the very
faintest star that our eyes can see, roughly magnitude 6?
17 • Exercises
37. You have enough information from this chapter to estimate the distance to Alpha Centauri, the second
nearest star, which has an apparent magnitude of 0. Since it is a G2 star, like the Sun, assume it has the
same luminosity as the Sun and the difference in magnitudes is a result only of the difference in distance.
Estimate how far away Alpha Centauri is. Describe the necessary steps in words and then do the
calculation. (As we will learn in the Celestial Distances chapter, this method—namely, assuming that stars
with identical spectral types emit the same amount of energy—is actually used to estimate distances to
stars.) If you assume the distance to the Sun is in AU, your answer will come out in AU.
38. Do the previous problem again, this time using the information that the Sun is 150,000,000 km away. You
will get a very large number of km as your answer. To get a better feeling for how the distances compare,
try calculating the time it takes light at a speed of 299,338 km/s to travel from the Sun to Earth and from
Alpha Centauri to Earth. For Alpha Centauri, figure out how long the trip will take in years as well as in
seconds.
39. Star A and Star B have different apparent brightnesses but identical luminosities. If Star A is 20 light-years
away from Earth and Star B is 40 light-years away from Earth, which star appears brighter and by what
factor?
40. Star A and Star B have different apparent brightnesses but identical luminosities. Star A is 10 light-years
away from Earth and appears 36 times brighter than Star B. How far away is Star B?
41. The star Sirius A has an apparent magnitude of −1.5. Sirius A has a dim companion, Sirius B, which is
10,000 times less bright than Sirius A. What is the apparent magnitude of Sirius B? Can Sirius B be seen
with the naked eye?
42. Our Sun, a type G star, has a surface temperature of 5800 K. We know, therefore, that it is cooler than a
type O star and hotter than a type M star. Given what you learned about the temperature ranges of these
types of stars, how many times hotter than our Sun is the hottest type O star? How many times cooler
than our Sun is the coolest type M star?
17 • Exercises
