Figure 18.1 Variety of Stars. Stars come in a variety of sizes, masses, temperatures, and luminosities. This image shows part of a
cluster of stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud (catalog number NGC 290). Located about 200,000 light-years away, NGC 290 is about
65 light-years across. Because the stars in this cluster are all at about the same distance from us, the differences in apparent
brightness correspond to differences in luminosity; differences in temperature account for the differences in color. The various
colors and luminosities of these stars provide clues about their life stories. (credit: modification of work by E. Olszewski (University of
Arizona), European Space Agency, NASA)
Chapter Outline
18.1 A Stellar Census
18.2 Measuring Stellar Masses
18.3 Diameters of Stars
18.4 The H–R Diagram
Thinking Ahead
How do stars form? How long do they live? And how do they die? Stop and think how hard it is to answer these
questions.
Stars live such a long time that nothing much can be gained from staring at one for a human lifetime. To
discover how stars evolve from birth to death, it was necessary to measure the characteristics of many stars
(to take a celestial census, in effect) and then determine which characteristics help us understand the stars’
life stories. Astronomers tried a variety of hypotheses about stars until they came up with the right approach
to understanding their development. But the key was first making a thorough census of the stars around us.
18.1
A Stellar Census
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain why the stars visible to the unaided eye are not typical
Describe the distribution of stellar masses found close to the Sun
Before we can make our own survey, we need to agree on a unit of distance appropriate to the objects we are
studying. The stars are all so far away that kilometers (and even astronomical units) would be very
The Stars: A Celestial Census
18 • Thinking Ahead
cumbersome to use; so—as discussed in Science and the Universe: A Brief Tour—astronomers use a much
larger “measuring stick” called the light-year. A light-year is the distance that light (the fastest signal we know)
travels in 1 year. Since light covers an astounding 300,000 kilometers per second, and since there are a lot of
seconds in 1 year, a light-year is a very large quantity: 9.5 trillion (9.5 × 1012) kilometers to be exact. (Bear in
mind that the light-year is a unit of distance even though the term year appears in it.) If you drove at the legal
US speed limit without stopping for food or rest, you would not arrive at the end of a light-year in space until
roughly 12 million years had passed. And the closest star is more than 4 light-years away.
Notice that we have not yet said much about how such enormous distances can be measured. That is a
complicated question, to which we will return in Celestial Distances. For now, let us assume that distances
have been measured for stars in our cosmic vicinity so that we can proceed with our census.
Small Is Beautiful—Or at Least More Common
When we do a census of people in the United States, we count the inhabitants by neighborhood. We can try
the same approach for our stellar census and begin with our own immediate neighborhood. As we shall see,
we run into two problems—just as we do with a census of human beings. First, it is hard to be sure we have
counted all the inhabitants; second, our local neighborhood may not contain all possible types of people.
Table 18.1 shows an estimate of the number of stars of each spectral type1 in our own local
neighborhood—within 21 light-years of the Sun. (The Milky Way Galaxy, in which we live, is about 100,000 lightyears in diameter, so this figure really applies to a very local neighborhood, one that contains a tiny fraction of
all the billions of stars in the Milky Way.) You can see that there are many more low-luminosity (and hence low
mass) stars than high-luminosity ones. Only three of the stars in our local neighborhood (one F type and two A
types) are significantly more luminous and more massive than the Sun. This is truly a case where small
triumphs over large—at least in terms of numbers. The Sun is more massive than the vast majority of stars in
our vicinity.
Stars within 21 Light-Years of the Sun
Spectral Type
Number of Stars
A
F
G
K
M
White dwarfs
Brown dwarfs
Table 18.1
This table is based on data published through 2015, and it is likely that more faint objects remain to be
discovered (see Figure 18.2). Along with the L and T brown dwarfs already observed in our neighborhood,
The spectral types of stars were defined and discussed in Analyzing Starlight.
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
astronomers expect to find perhaps hundreds of additional T dwarfs and Y dwarfs. Many of these are likely to
be even cooler than the coolest currently known T dwarf. The reason the lowest-mass dwarfs are so hard to
find is that they put out very little light—ten thousand to a million times less light than the Sun. Only recently
has our technology progressed to the point that we can detect these dim, cool objects.
Figure 18.2 Dwarf Simulation. This computer simulation shows the stars in our neighborhood as they would be seen from a
distance of 30 light-years away. The Sun is in the center. All the brown dwarfs are circled; those found earlier are circled in blue, the
ones found recently with the WISE infrared telescope in space (whose scientists put this diagram together) are circled in red. The
common M stars, which are red and faint, are made to look brighter than they really would be so that you can see them in the
simulation. Note that luminous hot stars like our Sun are very rare. (credit: modification of work by NASA/ JPL-Caltech)
To put all this in perspective, we note that even though the stars counted in the table are our closest
neighbors, you can’t just look up at the night sky and see them without a telescope; stars fainter than the Sun
cannot be seen with the unaided eye unless they are very nearby. For example, stars with luminosities ranging
from 1/100 to 1/10,000 the luminosity of the Sun (LSun) are very common, but a star with a luminosity of 1/100
LSun would have to be within 5 light-years to be visible to the naked eye—and only three stars (all in one
system) are this close to us. The nearest of these three stars, Proxima Centauri, still cannot be seen without a
telescope because it has such a low luminosity.
Astronomers are working hard these days to complete the census of our local neighborhood by finding our
faintest neighbors. Recent discoveries of nearby stars have relied heavily upon infrared telescopes that are
able to find these many cool, low-mass stars. You should expect the number of known stars within 21 lightyears of the Sun to keep increasing as more and better surveys are undertaken.
Bright Does Not Necessarily Mean Close
If we confine our census to the local neighborhood, we will miss many of the most interesting kinds of stars.
After all, the neighborhood in which you live does not contain all the types of people—distinguished according
to age, education, income, race, and so on—that live in the entire country. For example, a few people do live to
be over 100 years old, but there may be no such individual within several miles of where you live. In order to
sample the full range of the human population, you would have to extend your census to a much larger area.
Similarly, some types of stars simply are not found nearby.
A clue that we are missing something in our stellar census comes from the fact that only six of the 20 stars that
appear brightest in our sky—Sirius, Vega, Altair, Alpha Centauri, Fomalhaut, and Procyon—are found within 26
light-years of the Sun (Figure 18.3). Why are we missing most of the brightest stars when we take our census
of the local neighborhood?
18.1 • A Stellar Census
Figure 18.3 The Closest Stars. (a) This image, taken with a wide-angle telescope at the European Southern Observatory in Chile,
shows the system of three stars that is our nearest neighbor. (b) Two bright stars that are close to each other (Alpha Centauri A and
B) blend their light together. (c) Indicated with an arrow (since you’d hardly notice it otherwise) is the much fainter Proxima Centauri
star, which is spectral type M. (credit: modification of work by ESO)
The answer, interestingly enough, is that the stars that appear brightest are not the ones closest to us. The
brightest stars look the way they do because they emit a very large amount of energy—so much, in fact, that
they do not have to be nearby to look brilliant. You can confirm this by looking at Appendix J, which gives
distances for the 20 stars that appear brightest from Earth. The most distant of these stars is more than 1000
light-years from us. In fact, it turns out that most of the stars visible without a telescope are hundreds of lightyears away and many times more luminous than the Sun. Among the 9000 stars visible to the unaided eye,
only about 50 are intrinsically fainter than the Sun. Note also that several of the stars in Appendix J are spectral
type B, a type that is completely missing from Table 18.1.
The most luminous of the bright stars listed in Appendix J emit more than 50,000 times more energy than does
the Sun. These highly luminous stars are missing from the solar neighborhood because they are very rare.
None of them happens to be in the tiny volume of space immediately surrounding the Sun, and only this small
volume was surveyed to get the data shown in Table 18.1.
For example, let’s consider the most luminous stars—those 100 or more times as luminous as the Sun.
Although such stars are rare, they are visible to the unaided eye, even when hundreds to thousands of lightyears away. A star with a luminosity 10,000 times greater than that of the Sun can be seen without a telescope
out to a distance of 5000 light-years. The volume of space included within a distance of 5000 light-years,
however, is enormous; so even though highly luminous stars are intrinsically rare, many of them are readily
visible to our unaided eye.
The contrast between these two samples of stars, those that are close to us and those that can be seen with
the unaided eye, is an example of a selection effect. When a population of objects (stars in this example)
includes a great variety of different types, we must be careful what conclusions we draw from an examination
of any particular subgroup. Certainly we would be fooling ourselves if we assumed that the stars visible to the
unaided eye are characteristic of the general stellar population; this subgroup is heavily weighted to the most
luminous stars. It requires much more effort to assemble a complete data set for the nearest stars, since most
are so faint that they can be observed only with a telescope. However, it is only by doing so that astronomers
are able to know about the properties of the vast majority of the stars, which are actually much smaller and
fainter than our own Sun. In the next section, we will look at how we measure some of these properties.
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
18.2
Measuring Stellar Masses
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Distinguish the different types of binary star systems
Understand how we can apply Newton’s version of Kepler’s third law to derive the sum of star masses in a
binary star system
Apply the relationship between stellar mass and stellar luminosity to determine the physical
characteristics of a star
The mass of a star—how much material it contains—is one of its most important characteristics. If we know a
star’s mass, as we shall see, we can estimate how long it will shine and what its ultimate fate will be. Yet the
mass of a star is very difficult to measure directly. Somehow, we need to put a star on the cosmic equivalent of
a scale.
Luckily, not all stars live like the Sun, in isolation from other stars. About half the stars are binary stars—two
stars that orbit each other, bound together by gravity. Masses of binary stars can be calculated from
measurements of their orbits, just as the mass of the Sun can be derived by measuring the orbits of the
planets around it (see Orbits and Gravity).
Binary Stars
Before we discuss in more detail how mass can be measured, we will take a closer look at stars that come in
pairs. The first binary star was discovered in 1650, less than half a century after Galileo began to observe the
sky with a telescope. John Baptiste Riccioli (1598–1671), an Italian astronomer, noted that the star Mizar, in the
middle of the Big Dipper’s handle, appeared through his telescope as two stars. Since that discovery,
thousands of binary stars have been cataloged. (Astronomers call any pair of stars that appear to be close to
each other in the sky double stars, but not all of these form a true binary, that is, not all of them are physically
associated. Some are just chance alignments of stars that are actually at different distances from us.) Although
stars most commonly come in pairs, there are also triple and quadruple systems.
One well-known binary star is Castor, located in the constellation of Gemini. By 1804, astronomer William
Herschel, who also discovered the planet Uranus, had noted that the fainter component of Castor had slightly
changed its position relative to the brighter component. (We use the term “component” to mean a member of
a star system.) Here was evidence that one star was moving around another. It was actually the first evidence
that gravitational influences exist outside the solar system. The orbital motion of a binary star is shown in
Figure 18.4. A binary star system in which both of the stars can be seen with a telescope is called a visual
binary.
18.2 • Measuring Stellar Masses
Figure 18.4 Revolution of a Binary Star. This figure shows seven observations of the mutual revolution of two stars, one a brown
dwarf and one an ultra-cool L dwarf. Each red dot on the orbit, which is shown by the blue ellipse, corresponds to the position of one
of the dwarfs relative to the other. The reason that the pair of stars looks different on the different dates is that some images were
taken with the Hubble Space Telescope and others were taken from the ground. The arrows point to the actual observations that
correspond to the positions of each red dot. From these observations, an international team of astronomers directly measured the
mass of an ultra-cool brown dwarf star for the first time. Barely the size of the planet Jupiter, the dwarf star weighs in at just 8.5% of
the mass of our Sun. (credit: modification of work by ESA/NASA and Herve Bouy (Max-Planck-Institut für Extraterrestrische Physik/
ESO, Germany))
Edward C. Pickering (1846–1919), at Harvard, discovered a second class of binary stars in 1889—a class in
which only one of the stars is actually seen directly. He was examining the spectrum of Mizar and found that
the dark absorption lines in the brighter star’s spectrum were usually double. Not only were there two lines
where astronomers normally saw only one, but the spacing of the lines was constantly changing. At times, the
lines even became single. Pickering correctly deduced that the brighter component of Mizar, called Mizar A, is
itself really two stars that revolve about each other in a period of 104 days. A star like Mizar A, which appears
as a single star when photographed or observed visually through the telescope, but which spectroscopy shows
really to be a double star, is called a spectroscopic binary.
Mizar, by the way, is a good example of just how complex such star systems can be. Mizar has been known for
centuries to have a faint companion called Alcor, which can be seen without a telescope. Mizar and Alcor form
an optical double—a pair of stars that appear close together in the sky but do not orbit each other. Through a
telescope, as Riccioli discovered in 1650, Mizar can be seen to have another, closer companion that does orbit
it; Mizar is thus a visual binary. The two components that make up this visual binary, known as Mizar A and
Mizar B, are both spectroscopic binaries. So, Mizar is really a quadruple system of stars.
Strictly speaking, it is not correct to describe the motion of a binary star system by saying that one star orbits
the other. Gravity is a mutual attraction. Each star exerts a gravitational force on the other, with the result that
both stars orbit a point between them called the center of mass. Imagine that the two stars are seated at
either end of a seesaw. The point at which the fulcrum would have to be located in order for the seesaw to
balance is the center of mass, and it is always closer to the more massive star (Figure 18.5).
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
Figure 18.5 Binary Star System. In a binary star system, both stars orbit their center of mass. The image shows the relative
positions of two, different-mass stars from their center of mass, similar to how two masses would have to be located on a seesaw in
order to keep it level. The star with the higher mass will be found closer to the center of mass, while the star with the lower mass will
be farther from it.
Figure 18.6 shows two stars (A and B) moving around their center of mass, along with one line in the spectrum
of each star that we observe from the system at different times. When one star is approaching us relative to
the center of mass, the other star is receding from us. In the top left illustration, star A is moving toward us, so
the line in its spectrum is Doppler-shifted toward the blue end of the spectrum. Star B is moving away from us,
so its line shows a redshift. When we observe the composite spectrum of the two stars, the line appears
double. When the two stars are both moving across our line of sight (neither away from nor toward us), they
both have the same radial velocity (that of the pair’s center of mass); hence, the spectral lines of the two stars
come together. This is shown in the two bottom illustrations in Figure 18.6.
Figure 18.6 Motions of Two Stars Orbiting Each Other and What the Spectrum Shows. We see changes in velocity because when
one star is moving toward Earth, the other is moving away; half a cycle later, the situation is reversed. Doppler shifts cause the
spectral lines to move back and forth. In diagrams 1 and 3, lines from both stars can be seen well separated from each other. When
the two stars are moving perpendicular to our line of sight (that is, they are not moving either toward or away from us), the two lines
are exactly superimposed, and so in diagrams 2 and 4, we see only a single spectral line. Note that in the diagrams, the orbit of the
star pair is tipped slightly with respect to the viewer (or if the viewer were looking at it in the sky, the orbit would be tilted with
respect to the viewer’s line of sight). If the orbit were exactly in the plane of the page or screen (or the sky), then it would look nearly
circular, but we would see no change in radial velocity (no part of the motion would be toward us or away from us.) If the orbit were
perpendicular to the plane of the page or screen, then the stars would appear to move back and forth in a straight line, and we
would see the largest-possible radial velocity variations. This diagram has been simplified for clarity. For more realistic situations, see
the animation in the following Link to Learning feature box.
18.2 • Measuring Stellar Masses
A plot showing how the velocities of the stars change with time is called a radial velocity curve; the curve for
the binary system in Figure 18.6 is shown in Figure 18.7.
Figure 18.7 Radial Velocities in a Spectroscopic Binary System. These curves plot the radial velocities of two stars in a
spectroscopic binary system, showing how the stars alternately approach and recede from Earth. Note that positive velocity means
the star is moving away from us, and negative velocity means the star is moving toward us. The center of mass of the system itself is
also moving away from us, indicated by the positive velocity of 40 kilometers per second. The positions on the curve corresponding
to the illustrations in Figure 18.6 are marked with the diagram number (1–4).
This animation (https://openstax.org/l/30binstaranim) lets you follow the orbits of a binary star system in
various combinations of the masses of the two stars.
Masses from the Orbits of Binary Stars
We can estimate the masses of binary star systems using Newton’s reformulation of Kepler’s third law
(discussed in Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation). Kepler found that the time a planet takes to go around
the Sun is related by a specific mathematical formula to its distance from the Sun. In our binary star situation,
if two objects are in mutual revolution, then the period (P) with which they go around each other is related to
the semimajor axis (D) of the orbit of one with respect to the other, according to this equation
where D is in astronomical units, P is measured in years, and M1 + M2 is the sum of the masses of the two stars
in units of the Sun’s mass. This is a very useful formula for astronomers; it says that if we can observe the size
of the orbit and the period of mutual revolution of the stars in a binary system, we can calculate the sum of
their masses.
Most spectroscopic binaries have periods ranging from a few days to a few months, with separations of
usually less than 1 AU between their member stars. Recall that an AU is the distance from Earth to the Sun, so
this is a small separation and very hard to see at the distances of stars. This is why many of these systems are
known to be double only through careful study of their spectra.
We can analyze a radial velocity curve (such as the one in Figure 18.7) to determine the masses of the stars in a
LINK TO LEARNING
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
spectroscopic binary. This is complex in practice but not hard in principle. We measure the speeds of the stars
from the Doppler effect. We then determine the period—how long the stars take to go through an orbital
cycle—from the velocity curve. Knowing how fast the stars are moving and how long they take to go around
tells us the circumference of the orbit and, hence, the separation of the stars in kilometers or astronomical
units. From Kepler’s law, the period and the separation allow us to calculate the sum of the stars’ masses.
Of course, knowing the sum of the masses is not as useful as knowing the mass of each star separately. But
the relative orbital speeds of the two stars can tell us how much of the total mass each star has. As we saw in
our seesaw analogy, the more massive star is closer to the center of mass and therefore has a smaller orbit.
Therefore, it moves more slowly to get around in the same time compared to the more distant, lower-mass
star. If we sort out the speeds relative to each other, we can sort out the masses relative to each other. In
practice, we also need to know how the binary system is oriented in the sky to our line of sight, but if we do,
and the just-described steps are carried out carefully, the result is a calculation of the masses of each of the
two stars in the system.
To summarize, a good measurement of the motion of two stars around a common center of mass, combined
with the laws of gravity, allows us to determine the masses of stars in such systems. These mass
measurements are absolutely crucial to developing a theory of how stars evolve. One of the best things about
this method is that it is independent of the location of the binary system. It works as well for stars 100 lightyears away from us as for those in our immediate neighborhood.
To take a specific example, Sirius is one of the few binary stars in Appendix J for which we have enough
information to apply Kepler’s third law:
In this case, the two stars, the one we usually call Sirius and its very faint companion, are separated by about
20 AU and have an orbital period of about 50 years. If we place these values in the formula we would have
This can be solved for the sum of the masses:
Therefore, the sum of masses of the two stars in the Sirius binary system is 3.2 times the Sun’s mass. In order
to determine the individual mass of each star, we would need the velocities of the two stars and the
orientation of the orbit relative to our line of sight.
The Range of Stellar Masses
How large can the mass of a star be? Stars more massive than the Sun are rare. None of the stars within 30
light-years of the Sun has a mass greater than four times that of the Sun. Searches at large distances from the
Sun have led to the discovery of a few stars with masses up to about 100 times that of the Sun, and a handful
of stars (a few out of several billion) may have masses as large as 250 solar masses. However, most stars have
less mass than the Sun.
According to theoretical calculations, the smallest mass that a true star can have is about 1/12 that of the Sun.
By a “true” star, astronomers mean one that becomes hot enough to fuse protons to form helium (as
discussed in The Sun: A Nuclear Powerhouse). Objects with masses between roughly 1/100 and 1/12 that of
the Sun may produce energy for a brief time by means of nuclear reactions involving deuterium, but they do
not become hot enough to fuse protons. Such objects are intermediate in mass between stars and planets and
have been given the name brown dwarfs (Figure 18.8). Brown dwarfs are similar to Jupiter in radius but have
masses from approximately 13 to 80 times larger than the mass of Jupiter.2
18.2 • Measuring Stellar Masses
Figure 18.8 Brown Dwarfs in Orion. These images, taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, show the region surrounding the
Trapezium star cluster inside the star-forming region called the Orion Nebula. (a) No brown dwarfs are seen in the visible light
image, both because they put out very little light in the visible and because they are hidden within the clouds of dust in this region.
(b) This image was taken in infrared light, which can make its way to us through the dust. The faintest objects in this image are
brown dwarfs with masses between 13 and 80 times the mass of Jupiter. (credit a: NASA, C.R. O’Dell and S.K. Wong (Rice University);
credit b: NASA; K.L. Luhman (Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics) and G. Schneider, E. Young, G. Rieke, A. Cotera, H. Chen,
M. Rieke, R. Thompson (Steward Observatory))
Still-smaller objects with masses less than about 1/100 the mass of the Sun (or 10 Jupiter masses) are called
planets. They may radiate energy produced by the radioactive elements that they contain, and they may also
radiate heat generated by slowly compressing under their own weight (a process called gravitational
contraction). However, their interiors will never reach temperatures high enough for any nuclear reactions, to
take place. Jupiter, whose mass is about 1/1000 the mass of the Sun, is unquestionably a planet, for example.
Until the 1990s, we could only detect planets in our own solar system, but now we have thousands of them
elsewhere as well. (We will discuss these exciting observations in The Birth of Stars and the Discovery of
Planets outside the Solar System.)
The Mass-Luminosity Relation
Now that we have measurements of the characteristics of many different types of stars, we can search for
relationships among the characteristics. For example, we can ask whether the mass and luminosity of a star
are related. It turns out that for most stars, they are: The more massive stars are generally also the more
luminous. This relationship, known as the mass-luminosity relation, is shown graphically in Figure 18.9. Each
point represents a star whose mass and luminosity are both known. The horizontal position on the graph
shows the star’s mass, given in units of the Sun’s mass, and the vertical position shows its luminosity in units
of the Sun’s luminosity.
Exactly where to put the dividing line between planets and brown dwarfs is a subject of some debate among astronomers as we
write this book (as is, in fact, the exact definition of each of these objects). Even those who accept deuterium fusion (see The Birth of
Stars and the Discovery of Planets outside the Solar System) as the crucial issue for brown dwarfs concede that, depending on the
composition of the star and other factors, the lowest mass for such a dwarf could be anywhere from 11 to 16 Jupiter masses.
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
Figure 18.9 Mass-Luminosity Relation. The plotted points show the masses and luminosities of stars. The three points lying below
the sequence of points are all white dwarf stars.
We can also say this in mathematical terms.
It’s a reasonably good approximation to say that luminosity (expressed in units of the Sun’s luminosity) varies
as the fourth power of the mass (in units of the Sun’s mass). (The symbol ~ means the two quantities are
proportional.) If two stars differ in mass by a factor of 2, then the more massive one will be 24, or about 16
times brighter; if one star is 1/3 the mass of another, it will be approximately 81 times less luminous.
E X A M P L E 1 8 . 1
Calculating the Mass from the Luminosity of a Star
The mass-luminosity formula can be rewritten so that a value of mass can be determined if the luminosity is
known.
Solution
First, we must get our units right by expressing both the mass and the luminosity of a star in units of the
Sun’s mass and luminosity:
Now we can take the 4th root of both sides, which is equivalent to taking both sides to the 1/4 = 0.25 power.
The formula in this case would be:
Check Your Learning
In the previous section, we determined the sum of the masses of the two stars in the Sirius binary system
(Sirius and its faint companion) using Kepler’s third law to be 3.2 solar masses. Using the mass-luminosity
relationship, calculate the mass of each individual star.
Answer:
In Appendix J, Sirius is listed with a luminosity 23 times that of the Sun. This value can be inserted into the
mass-luminosity relationship to get the mass of Sirius:
18.2 • Measuring Stellar Masses
The mass of the companion star to Sirius is then 3.2 – 2.2 = 1.0 solar mass.
Notice how good this mass-luminosity relationship is. Most stars (see Figure 18.9) fall along a line running
from the lower-left (low mass, low luminosity) corner of the diagram to the upper-right (high mass, high
luminosity) corner. About 90% of all stars obey the mass-luminosity relation. Later, we will explore why such a
relationship exists and what we can learn from the roughly 10% of stars that “disobey” it.
This visualization (https://openstax.org/l/30starmass) illustrates how all the properties of a star are
determined by the mass that the star happened to form with and how these properties change when you
change the mass.
18.3
Diameters of Stars
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the methods used to determine star diameters
Identify the parts of an eclipsing binary star light curve that correspond to the diameters of the individual
components
It is easy to measure the diameter of the Sun. Its angular diameter—that is, its apparent size on the sky—is
about 1/2°. If we know the angle the Sun takes up in the sky and how far away it is, we can calculate its true
(linear) diameter, which is 1.39 million kilometers, or about 109 times the diameter of Earth.
Unfortunately, the Sun is the only star whose angular diameter is easily measured. All the other stars are so far
away that they look like pinpoints of light through even the largest ground-based telescopes. (They often seem
to be bigger, but that is merely distortion introduced by turbulence in Earth’s atmosphere.) Luckily, there are
several techniques that astronomers can use to estimate the sizes of stars.
Stars Blocked by the Moon
One technique, which gives very precise diameters but can be used for only a few stars, is to observe the
dimming of light that occurs when the Moon passes in front of a star. What astronomers measure (with great
precision) is the time required for the star’s brightness to drop to zero as the edge of the Moon moves across
the star’s disk. Since we know how rapidly the Moon moves in its orbit around Earth, it is possible to calculate
the angular diameter of the star. If the distance to the star is also known, we can calculate its diameter in
kilometers. This method works only for fairly bright stars that happen to lie along the zodiac, where the Moon
(or, much more rarely, a planet) can pass in front of them as seen from Earth.
Eclipsing Binary Stars
Accurate sizes for a large number of stars come from measurements of eclipsing binary star systems, and so
we must make a brief detour from our main story to examine this type of star system. Some binary stars are
lined up in such a way that, when viewed from Earth, each star passes in front of the other during every
revolution (Figure 18.10). When one star blocks the light of the other, preventing it from reaching Earth, the
brightness of the system decreases, and astronomers say that an eclipse has occurred.
LINK TO LEARNING
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
Figure 18.10 Light Curve of an Eclipsing Binary. The light curve of an eclipsing binary star system shows how the combined light
from both stars changes due to eclipses over the time span of an orbit. This light curve shows the behavior of a hypothetical
eclipsing binary star with total eclipses (one star passes directly in front of and behind the other). The numbers indicate parts of the
light curve corresponding to various positions of the smaller star in its orbit. In this diagram, we have assumed that the smaller star
is also the hotter one so that it emits more flux (energy per second per square meter) than the larger one. When the smaller, hotter
star goes behind the larger one, its light is completely blocked, and so there is a strong dip in the light curve. When the smaller star
goes in front of the bigger one, a small amount of light from the bigger star is blocked, so there is a smaller dip in the light curve.
The discovery of the first eclipsing binary helped solve a long-standing puzzle in astronomy. The star Algol, in
the constellation of Perseus, changes its brightness in an odd but regular way. Normally, Algol is a fairly bright
star, but at intervals of 2 days, 20 hours, 49 minutes, it fades to one-third of its regular brightness. After a few
hours, it brightens to normal again. This effect is easily seen, even without a telescope, if you know what to
look for.
In 1783, a young English astronomer named John Goodricke (1764–1786) made a careful study of Algol (see the
feature on John Goodricke for a discussion of his life and work). Even though Goodricke could neither hear nor
speak, he made a number of major discoveries in the 21 years of his brief life. He suggested that Algol’s
unusual brightness variations might be due to an invisible companion that regularly passes in front of the
brighter star and blocks its light. Unfortunately, Goodricke had no way to test this idea, since it was not until
about a century later that equipment became good enough to measure Algol’s spectrum.
In 1889, the German astronomer Hermann Vogel (1841–1907) demonstrated that, like Mizar, Algol is a
spectroscopic binary. The spectral lines of Algol were not observed to be double because the fainter star of the
pair gives off too-little light compared with the brighter star for its lines to be conspicuous in the composite
spectrum. Nevertheless, the periodic shifting back and forth of the brighter star’s lines gave evidence that it
was revolving about an unseen companion. (The lines of both components need not be visible for a star to be
recognized as a spectroscopic binary.)
The discovery that Algol is a spectroscopic binary verified Goodricke’s hypothesis. The plane in which the stars
revolve is turned nearly edgewise to our line of sight, and each star passes in front of the other during every
revolution. (The eclipse of the fainter star in the Algol system is not very noticeable because the part of it that
is covered contributes little to the total light of the system. This second eclipse can, however, be detected by
careful measurements.)
Any binary star produces eclipses if viewed from the proper direction, near the plane of its orbit, so that one
star passes in front of the other (see Figure 18.10). But from our vantage point on Earth, only a few binary star
systems are oriented in this way.
18.3 • Diameters of Stars
Astronomy and Mythology: Algol the Demon Star and Perseus the Hero
The name Algol comes from the Arabic Ras al Ghul, meaning “the demon’s head.”3 The word “ghoul” in
English has the same derivation. As discussed in Observing the Sky: The Birth of Astronomy, many of the
bright stars have Arabic names because during the long dark ages in medieval Europe, it was Arabic
astronomers who preserved and expanded the Greek and Roman knowledge of the skies. The reference to
the demon is part of the ancient Greek legend of the hero Perseus, who is commemorated by the
constellation in which we find Algol and whose adventures involve many of the characters associated with
the northern constellations.
Perseus was one of the many half-god heroes fathered by Zeus (Jupiter in the Roman version), the king of
the gods in Greek mythology. Zeus had, to put it delicately, a roving eye and was always fathering
somebody or other with a human maiden who caught his fancy. (Perseus derives from Per Zeus, meaning
“fathered by Zeus.”) Set adrift with his mother by an (understandably) upset stepfather, Perseus grew up
on an island in the Aegean Sea. The king there, taking an interest in Perseus’ mother, tried to get rid of the
young man by assigning him an extremely difficult task.
In a moment of overarching pride, a beautiful young woman named Medusa had compared her golden hair
to that of the goddess Athena (Minerva for the Romans). The Greek gods did not take kindly to being
compared to mere mortals, and Athena turned Medusa into a gorgon: a hideous, evil creature with writhing
snakes for hair and a face that turned anyone who looked at it into stone. Perseus was given the task of
slaying this demon, which seemed like a pretty sure way to get him out of the way forever.
But because Perseus had a god for a father, some of the other gods gave him tools for the job, including
Athena’s reflective shield and the winged sandals of Hermes (Mercury in the Roman story). By flying over
her and looking only at her reflection, Perseus was able to cut off Medusa’s head without ever looking at
her directly. Taking her head (which, conveniently, could still turn onlookers to stone even without being
attached to her body) with him, Perseus continued on to other adventures.
He next came to a rocky seashore, where boasting had gotten another family into serious trouble with the
gods. Queen Cassiopeia had dared to compare her own beauty to that of the Nereids, sea nymphs who
were daughters of Poseidon (Neptune in Roman mythology), the god of the sea. Poseidon was so offended
that he created a sea-monster named Cetus to devastate the kingdom. King Cepheus, Cassiopeia’s
beleaguered husband, consulted the oracle, who told him that he must sacrifice his beautiful daughter
Andromeda to the monster.
When Perseus came along and found Andromeda chained to a rock near the sea, awaiting her fate, he
rescued her by turning the monster to stone. (Scholars of mythology actually trace the essence of this story
back to far-older legends from ancient Mesopotamia, in which the god-hero Marduk vanquishes a monster
named Tiamat. Symbolically, a hero like Perseus or Marduk is usually associated with the Sun, the monster
with the power of night, and the beautiful maiden with the fragile beauty of dawn, which the Sun releases
after its nightly struggle with darkness.)
Many of the characters in these Greek legends can be found as constellations in the sky, not necessarily
resembling their namesakes but serving as reminders of the story. For example, vain Cassiopeia is
sentenced to be very close to the celestial pole, rotating perpetually around the sky and hanging upside
down every winter. The ancients imagined Andromeda still chained to her rock (it is much easier to see the
chain of stars than to recognize the beautiful maiden in this star grouping). Perseus is next to her with the
MAKING CONNECTIONS
Fans of Batman comic books and movies will recognize that this name was given to an archvillain in the series.
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
head of Medusa swinging from his belt. Algol represents this gorgon head and has long been associated
with evil and bad fortune in such tales. Some commentators have speculated that the star’s change in
brightness (which can be observed with the unaided eye) may have contributed to its unpleasant
reputation, with the ancients regarding such a change as a sort of evil “wink.”
Diameters of Eclipsing Binary Stars
We now turn back to the main thread of our story to discuss how all this can be used to measure the sizes of
stars. The technique involves making a light curve of an eclipsing binary, a graph that plots how the brightness
changes with time. Let us consider a hypothetical binary system in which the stars are very different in size,
like those illustrated in Figure 18.11. To make life easy, we will assume that the orbit is viewed exactly edge-on.
Even though we cannot see the two stars separately in such a system, the light curve can tell us what is
happening. When the smaller star just starts to pass behind the larger star (a point we call first contact), the
brightness begins to drop. The eclipse becomes total (the smaller star is completely hidden) at the point called
second contact. At the end of the total eclipse (third contact), the smaller star begins to emerge. When the
smaller star has reached last contact, the eclipse is completely over.
To see how this allows us to measure diameters, look carefully at Figure 18.11. During the time interval
between the first and second contacts, the smaller star has moved a distance equal to its own diameter.
During the time interval from the first to third contacts, the smaller star has moved a distance equal to the
diameter of the larger star. If the spectral lines of both stars are visible in the spectrum of the binary, then the
speed of the smaller star with respect to the larger one can be measured from the Doppler shift. But knowing
the speed with which the smaller star is moving and how long it took to cover some distance can tell the span
of that distance—in this case, the diameters of the stars. The speed multiplied by the time interval from the
first to second contact gives the diameter of the smaller star. We multiply the speed by the time between the
first and third contacts to get the diameter of the larger star.
Figure 18.11 Light Curve of an Edge-On Eclipsing Binary. Here we see the light curve of a hypothetical eclipsing binary star whose
orbit we view exactly edge-on, in which the two stars fully eclipse each other. From the time intervals between contacts, it is possible
to estimate the diameters of the two stars.
In actuality, the situation with eclipsing binaries is often a bit more complicated: orbits are generally not seen
exactly edge-on, and the light from each star may be only partially blocked by the other. Furthermore, binary
star orbits, just like the orbits of the planets, are ellipses, not circles. However, all these effects can be sorted
18.3 • Diameters of Stars
out from very careful measurements of the light curve.
The Eclipsing Binary Simulator (https://openstax.org/l/30eclipsbinsim) allows you to explore how the
eclipse timing can be used to determine the size of stars in a binary pair. Other traits can be explored as
well, such as their mass, separation, and surface temperatures.
Using the Radiation Law to Get the Diameter
Another method for measuring star diameters makes use of the Stefan-Boltzmann law for the relationship
between energy radiated and temperature (see Radiation and Spectra). In this method, the energy flux
(energy emitted per second per square meter by a blackbody, like the Sun) is given by
where σ is a constant and T is the temperature. The surface area of a sphere (like a star) is given by
The luminosity (L) of a star is then given by its surface area in square meters times the energy flux:
Previously, we determined the masses of the two stars in the Sirius binary system. Sirius gives off 8200 times
more energy than its fainter companion star, although both stars have nearly identical temperatures. The
extremely large difference in luminosity is due to the difference in radius, since the temperatures and hence
the energy fluxes for the two stars are nearly the same. To determine the relative sizes of the two stars, we
take the ratio of the corresponding luminosities:
Therefore, the relative sizes of the two stars can be found by taking the square root of the relative luminosity.
Since
, the radius of Sirius is 91 times larger than the radius of its faint companion.
The method for determining the radius shown here requires both stars be visible, which is not always the case.
Use the Stellar Luminosity Simulato (https://openstax.org/l/30stellumsim) to explore the relationship
between a star’s surface temperature, luminosity, and radius. Move the sliders to see what happens. Try to
make two stars with the same luminosity but different surface temperatures.
LINK TO LEARNING
LINK TO LEARNING
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
Stellar Diameters
The results of many stellar size measurements over the years have shown that most nearby stars are roughly
the size of the Sun, with typical diameters of a million kilometers or so. Faint stars, as we might have expected,
are generally smaller than more luminous stars. However, there are some dramatic exceptions to this simple
generalization.
A few of the very luminous stars, those that are also red (indicating relatively low surface temperatures), turn
out to be truly enormous. These stars are called, appropriately enough, giant stars or supergiant stars. An
example is Betelgeuse, the second brightest star in the constellation of Orion and one of the dozen brightest
stars in our sky. Its diameter, remarkably, is greater than 10 AU (1.5 billion kilometers!), large enough to fill the
entire inner solar system almost as far out as Jupiter. In Stars from Adolescence to Old Age, we will look in
detail at the evolutionary process that leads to the formation of such giant and supergiant stars.
Watch this star size comparison video (https://openstax.org/l/30starsizecomp) for a striking visual that
highlights the size of stars versus planets and the range of sizes among stars.
18.4
The H–R Diagram
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Identify the physical characteristics of stars that are used to create an H–R diagram, and describe how
those characteristics vary among groups of stars
Discuss the physical properties of most stars found at different locations on the H–R diagram, such as
radius, and for main sequence stars, mass
In this chapter and Analyzing Starlight, we described some of the characteristics by which we might classify
stars and how those are measured. These ideas are summarized in Table 18.2. We have also given an example
of a relationship between two of these characteristics in the mass-luminosity relation. When the characteristics
of large numbers of stars were measured at the beginning of the twentieth century, astronomers were able to
begin a deeper search for patterns and relationships in these data.
Measuring the Characteristics of Stars
Characteristic
Technique
Surface temperature
1. Determine the color (very rough).
2. Measure the spectrum and get the spectral type.
Chemical composition
Determine which lines are present in the spectrum.
Luminosity
Measure the apparent brightness and compensate for distance.
Radial velocity
Measure the Doppler shift in the spectrum.
Table 18.2
LINK TO LEARNING
18.4 • The H–R Diagram
Characteristic
Technique
Rotation
Measure the width of spectral lines.
Mass
Measure the period and radial velocity curves of spectroscopic binary stars.
Diameter
1. Measure the way a star’s light is blocked by the Moon.
2. Measure the light curves and Doppler shifts for eclipsing binary stars.
Table 18.2
To help understand what sorts of relationships might be found, let’s look briefly at a range of data about
human beings. If you want to understand humans by comparing and contrasting their
characteristics—without assuming any previous knowledge of these strange creatures—you could try to
determine which characteristics lead you in a fruitful direction. For example, you might plot the heights of a
large sample of humans against their weights (which is a measure of their mass). Such a plot is shown in
Figure 18.12 and it has some interesting features. In the way we have chosen to present our data, height
increases upward, whereas weight increases to the left. Notice that humans are not randomly distributed in
the graph. Most points fall along a sequence that goes from the upper left to the lower right.
Figure 18.12 Height versus Weight. The plot of the heights and weights of a representative group of human beings. Most points lie
along a “main sequence” representing most people, but there are a few exceptions.
We can conclude from this graph that human height and weight are related. Generally speaking, taller human
beings weigh more, whereas shorter ones weigh less. This makes sense if you are familiar with the structure of
human beings. Typically, if we have bigger bones, we have more flesh to fill out our larger frame. It’s not
mathematically exact—there is a wide range of variation—but it’s not a bad overall rule. And, of course, there
are some dramatic exceptions. You occasionally see a short human who is very overweight and would thus be
more to the bottom left of our diagram than the average sequence of people. Or you might have a very tall,
skinny fashion model with great height but relatively small weight, who would be found near the upper right.
A similar diagram has been found extremely useful for understanding the lives of stars. In 1913, American
astronomer Henry Norris Russell plotted the luminosities of stars against their spectral classes (a way of
denoting their surface temperatures). This investigation, and a similar independent study in 1911 by Danish
astronomer Ejnar Hertzsprung, led to the extremely important discovery that the temperature and luminosity
of stars are related (Figure 18.13).
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
Figure 18.13 Hertzsprung (1873–1967) and Russell (1877–1957). (a) Ejnar Hertzsprung and (b) Henry Norris Russell independently
discovered the relationship between the luminosity and surface temperature of stars that is summarized in what is now called the
H–R diagram.
Henry Norris Russell
When Henry Norris Russell graduated from Princeton University, his work had been so brilliant that the
faculty decided to create a new level of honors degree beyond “summa cum laude” for him. His students
later remembered him as a man whose thinking was three times faster than just about anybody else’s. His
memory was so phenomenal, he could correctly quote an enormous number of poems and limericks, the
entire Bible, tables of mathematical functions, and almost anything he had learned about astronomy. He
was nervous, active, competitive, critical, and very articulate; he tended to dominate every meeting he
attended. In outward appearance, he was an old-fashioned product of the nineteenth century who wore
high-top black shoes and high starched collars, and carried an umbrella every day of his life. His 264 papers
were enormously influential in many areas of astronomy.
Born in 1877, the son of a Presbyterian minister, Russell showed early promise. When he was 12, his family
sent him to live with an aunt in Princeton so he could attend a top preparatory school. He lived in the same
house in that town until his death in 1957 (interrupted only by a brief stay in Europe for graduate work). He
was fond of recounting that both his mother and his maternal grandmother had won prizes in
mathematics, and that he probably inherited his talents in that field from their side of the family.
Before Russell, American astronomers devoted themselves mainly to surveying the stars and making
impressive catalogs of their properties, especially their spectra (as described in Analyzing Starlight. Russell
began to see that interpreting the spectra of stars required a much more sophisticated understanding of
the physics of the atom, a subject that was being developed by European physicists in the 1910s and 1920s.
Russell embarked on a lifelong quest to ascertain the physical conditions inside stars from the clues in their
spectra; his work inspired, and was continued by, a generation of astronomers, many trained by Russell and
his collaborators.
Russell also made important contributions in the study of binary stars and the measurement of star
masses, the origin of the solar system, the atmospheres of planets, and the measurement of distances in
astronomy, among other fields. He was an influential teacher and popularizer of astronomy, writing a
column on astronomical topics for Scientific American magazine for more than 40 years. He and two
colleagues wrote a textbook for college astronomy classes that helped train astronomers and astronomy
enthusiasts over several decades. That book set the scene for the kind of textbook you are now reading,
which not only lays out the facts of astronomy but also explains how they fit together. Russell gave lectures
VOYAGERS IN ASTRONOMY
18.4 • The H–R Diagram
around the country, often emphasizing the importance of understanding modern physics in order to grasp
what was happening in astronomy.
Harlow Shapley, director of the Harvard College Observatory, called Russell “the dean of American
astronomers.” Russell was certainly regarded as the leader of the field for many years and was consulted
on many astronomical problems by colleagues from around the world. Today, one of the highest
recognitions that an astronomer can receive is an award from the American Astronomical Society called the
Russell Prize, set up in his memory.
Features of the H–R Diagram
Following Hertzsprung and Russell, let us plot the temperature (or spectral class) of a selected group of nearby
stars against their luminosity and see what we find (Figure 18.14). Such a plot is frequently called the
Hertzsprung–Russell diagram, abbreviated H–R diagram. It is one of the most important and widely used
diagrams in astronomy, with applications that extend far beyond the purposes for which it was originally
developed more than a century ago.
Figure 18.14 H–R Diagram for a Selected Sample of Stars. In such diagrams, luminosity is plotted along the vertical axis. Along the
horizontal axis, we can plot either temperature or spectral type (also sometimes called spectral class). Several of the brightest stars
are identified by name. Most stars fall on the main sequence.
It is customary to plot H–R diagrams in such a way that temperature increases toward the left and luminosity
toward the top. Notice the similarity to our plot of height and weight for people (Figure 18.12). Stars, like
people, are not distributed over the diagram at random, as they would be if they exhibited all combinations of
luminosity and temperature. Instead, we see that the stars cluster into certain parts of the H–R diagram. The
great majority are aligned along a narrow sequence running from the upper left (hot, highly luminous) to the
lower right (cool, less luminous). This band of points is called the main sequence. It represents a relationship
between temperature and luminosity that is followed by most stars. We can summarize this relationship by
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
saying that hotter stars are more luminous than cooler ones.
A number of stars, however, lie above the main sequence on the H–R diagram, in the upper-right region,
where stars have low temperature and high luminosity. How can a star be at once cool, meaning each square
meter on the star does not put out all that much energy, and yet very luminous? The only way is for the star to
be enormous—to have so many square meters on its surface that the total energy output is still large. These
stars must be giants or supergiants, the stars of huge diameter we discussed earlier.
There are also some stars in the lower-left corner of the diagram, which have high temperature and low
luminosity. If they have high surface temperatures, each square meter on that star puts out a lot of energy.
How then can the overall star be dim? It must be that it has a very small total surface area; such stars are
known as white dwarfs (white because, at these high temperatures, the colors of the electromagnetic
radiation that they emit blend together to make them look bluish-white). We will say more about these
puzzling objects in a moment. Figure 18.15 is a schematic H–R diagram for a large sample of stars, drawn to
make the different types more apparent.
Figure 18.15 Schematic H–R Diagram for Many Stars. Ninety percent of all stars on such a diagram fall along a narrow band called
the main sequence. A minority of stars are found in the upper right; they are both cool (and hence red) and bright, and must be
giants. Some stars fall in the lower left of the diagram; they are both hot and dim, and must be white dwarfs.
Now, think back to our discussion of star surveys. It is difficult to plot an H–R diagram that is truly
representative of all stars because most stars are so faint that we cannot see those outside our immediate
neighborhood. The stars plotted in Figure 18.14 were selected because their distances are known. This sample
omits many intrinsically faint stars that are nearby but have not had their distances measured, so it shows
fewer faint main-sequence stars than a “fair” diagram would. To be truly representative of the stellar
population, an H–R diagram should be plotted for all stars within a certain distance. Unfortunately, our
knowledge is reasonably complete only for stars within 10 to 20 light-years of the Sun, among which there are
no giants or supergiants. Still, from many surveys (and more can now be done with new, more powerful
telescopes), we estimate that about 90% of the true stars overall (excluding brown dwarfs) in our part of space
are main-sequence stars, about 10% are white dwarfs, and fewer than 1% are giants or supergiants.
These estimates can be used directly to understand the lives of stars. Permit us another quick analogy with
people. Suppose we survey people just like astronomers survey stars, but we want to focus our attention on
the location of young people, ages 6 to 18 years. Survey teams fan out and take data about where such
youngsters are found at all times during a 24-hour day. Some are found in the local pizza parlor, others are
asleep at home, some are at the movies, and many are in school. After surveying a very large number of young
people, one of the things that the teams determine is that, averaged over the course of the 24 hours, one-third
of all youngsters are found in school.
18.4 • The H–R Diagram
How can they interpret this result? Does it mean that two-thirds of students are truants and the remaining
one-third spend all their time in school? No, we must bear in mind that the survey teams counted youngsters
throughout the full 24-hour day. Some survey teams worked at night, when most youngsters were at home
asleep, and others worked in the late afternoon, when most youngsters were on their way home from school
(and more likely to be enjoying a pizza). If the survey was truly representative, we can conclude, however, that
if an average of one-third of all youngsters are found in school, then humans ages 6 to 18 years must spend
about one-third of their time in school.
We can do something similar for stars. We find that, on average, 90% of all stars are located on the main
sequence of the H–R diagram. If we can identify some activity or life stage with the main sequence, then it
follows that stars must spend 90% of their lives in that activity or life stage.
Understanding the Main Sequence
In The Sun: A Nuclear Powerhouse, we discussed the Sun as a representative star. We saw that what stars such
as the Sun “do for a living” is to convert protons into helium deep in their interiors via the process of nuclear
fusion, thus producing energy. The fusion of protons to helium is an excellent, long-lasting source of energy
for a star because the bulk of every star consists of hydrogen atoms, whose nuclei are protons.
Our computer models of how stars evolve over time show us that a typical star will spend about 90% of its life
fusing the abundant hydrogen in its core into helium. This then is a good explanation of why 90% of all stars
are found on the main sequence in the H–R diagram. But if all the stars on the main sequence are doing the
same thing (fusing hydrogen), why are they distributed along a sequence of points? That is, why do they differ
in luminosity and surface temperature (which is what we are plotting on the H–R diagram)?
To help us understand how main-sequence stars differ, we can use one of the most important results from our
studies of model stars. Astrophysicists have been able to show that the structure of stars that are in
equilibrium and derive all their energy from nuclear fusion is completely and uniquely determined by just two
quantities: the total mass and the composition of the star. This fact provides an interpretation of many
features of the H–R diagram.
Imagine a cluster of stars forming from a cloud of interstellar “raw material” whose chemical composition is
similar to the Sun’s. (We’ll describe this process in more detail in The Birth of Stars and Discovery of Planets
outside the Solar System, but for now, the details will not concern us.) In such a cloud, all the clumps of gas
and dust that become stars begin with the same chemical composition and differ from one another only in
mass. Now suppose that we compute a model of each of these stars for the time at which it becomes stable
and derives its energy from nuclear reactions, but before it has time to alter its composition appreciably as a
result of these reactions.
The models calculated for these stars allow us to determine their luminosities, temperatures, and sizes. If we
plot the results from the models—one point for each model star—on the H–R diagram, we get something that
looks just like the main sequence we saw for real stars.
And here is what we find when we do this. The model stars with the largest masses are the hottest and most
luminous, and they are located at the upper left of the diagram.
The least-massive model stars are the coolest and least luminous, and they are placed at the lower right of the
plot. The other model stars all lie along a line running diagonally across the diagram. In other words, the main
sequence turns out to be a sequence of stellar masses.
This makes sense if you think about it. The most massive stars have the most gravity and can thus compress
their centers to the greatest degree. This means they are the hottest inside and the best at generating energy
from nuclear reactions deep within. As a result, they shine with the greatest luminosity and have the hottest
surface temperatures. The stars with lowest mass, in turn, are the coolest inside and least effective in
generating energy. Thus, they are the least luminous and wind up being the coolest on the surface. Our Sun
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
lies somewhere in the middle of these extremes (as you can see in Figure 18.14). The characteristics of
representative main-sequence stars (excluding brown dwarfs, which are not true stars) are listed in Table 18.3.
Characteristics of Main-Sequence Stars
Spectral Type
Mass (Sun = 1)
Luminosity (Sun = 1)
Temperature
Radius (Sun = 1)
O5
7 × 105
40,000 K
B0
2.7 × 105
28,000 K
A0
3.3
10,000 K
2.5
F0
1.7
7500 K
1.4
G0
1.1
1.4
6000 K
1.1
K0
0.8
0.35
5000 K
0.8
M0
0.4
0.05
3500 K
0.6
Table 18.3
Note that we’ve seen this 90% figure come up before. This is exactly what we found earlier when we examined
the mass-luminosity relation (Figure 18.9). We observed that 90% of all stars seem to follow the relationship;
these are the 90% of all stars that lie on the main sequence in our H–R diagram. Our models and our
observations agree.
What about the other stars on the H–R diagram—the giants and supergiants, and the white dwarfs? As we will
see in the next few chapters, these are what main-sequence stars turn into as they age: They are the later
stages in a star’s life. As a star consumes its nuclear fuel, its source of energy changes, as do its chemical
composition and interior structure. These changes cause the star to alter its luminosity and surface
temperature so that it no longer lies on the main sequence on our diagram. Because stars spend much less
time in these later stages of their lives, we see fewer stars in those regions of the H–R diagram.
Extremes of Stellar Luminosities, Diameters, and Densities
We can use the H–R diagram to explore the extremes in size, luminosity, and density found among the stars.
Such extreme stars are not only interesting to fans of the Guinness Book of World Records; they can teach us a
lot about how stars work. For example, we saw that the most massive main-sequence stars are the most
luminous ones. We know of a few extreme stars that are a million times more luminous than the Sun, with
masses that exceed 100 times the Sun’s mass. These superluminous stars, which are at the upper left of the
H–R diagram, are exceedingly hot, very blue stars of spectral type O. These are the stars that would be the
most conspicuous at vast distances in space.
The cool supergiants in the upper corner of the H–R diagram are as much as 10,000 times as luminous as the
Sun. In addition, these stars have diameters very much larger than that of the Sun. As discussed above, some
supergiants are so large that if the solar system could be centered in one, the star’s surface would lie beyond
the orbit of Mars (see Figure 18.16). We will have to ask, in coming chapters, what process can make a star
swell up to such an enormous size, and how long these “swollen” stars can last in their distended state.
18.4 • The H–R Diagram
Figure 18.16 The Sun and a Supergiant. Here you see how small the Sun looks in comparison to one of the largest known stars: VY
Canis Majoris, a supergiant.
In contrast, the very common red, cool, low-luminosity stars at the lower end of the main sequence are much
smaller and more compact than the Sun. An example of such a red dwarf is Ross 614B, with a surface
temperature of 2700 K and only 1/2000 of the Sun’s luminosity. We call such a star a dwarf because its
diameter is only 1/10 that of the Sun. A star with such a low luminosity also has a low mass (about 1/12 that of
the Sun). This combination of mass and diameter means that it is so compressed that the star has an average
density about 80 times that of the Sun. Its density must be higher, in fact, than that of any known solid found
on the surface of Earth. (Despite this, the star is made of gas throughout because its center is so hot.)
The faint, red, main-sequence stars are not the stars of the most extreme densities, however. The white
dwarfs, at the lower-left corner of the H–R diagram, have densities many times greater still.
The White Dwarfs
The first white dwarf star was detected in 1862. Called Sirius B, it forms a binary system with Sirius A, the
brightest-appearing star in the sky. It eluded discovery and analysis for a long time because its faint light
tends to be lost in the glare of nearby Sirius A (Figure 18.17). (Since Sirius is often called the Dog Star—being
the brightest star in the constellation of Canis Major, the big dog—Sirius B is sometimes nicknamed the Pup.)
18 • The Stars: A Celestial Census
Figure 18.17 Two Views of Sirius and Its White Dwarf Companion. (a) The (visible light) image, taken with the Hubble Space
Telescope, shows bright Sirius A, and, below it and off to its left, faint Sirius B. (b) This image of the Sirius star system was taken with
the Chandra X-Ray Telescope. Now, the bright object is the white dwarf companion, Sirius B. Sirius A is the faint object above it; what
we are seeing from Sirius is probably not actually X-ray radiation but rather ultraviolet light that has leaked into the detector. Note
that the ultraviolet intensities of these two objects are completely reversed from the situation in visible light because Sirius B is
hotter and emits more higher-frequency radiation. (credit a: modification of work by NASA, H.E. Bond and E. Nelan (Space Telescope
Science Institute), M. Barstow and M. Burleigh (University of Leicester) and J.B. Holberg (University of Arizona); credit b: modification
of work by NASA/SAO/CXC)
We have now found thousands of white dwarfs. Table 18.1 shows that about 7% of the true stars (spectral
types O–M) in our local neighborhood are white dwarfs. A good example of a typical white dwarf is the nearby
star 40 Eridani B. Its surface temperature is a relatively hot 12,000 K, but its luminosity is only 1/275 LSun.
Calculations show that its radius is only 1.4% of the Sun’s, or about the same as that of Earth, and its volume is
2.5 × 10–6 that of the Sun. Its mass, however, is 0.57 times the Sun’s mass, just a little more than half. To fit
such a substantial mass into so tiny a volume, the star’s density must be about 210,000 times the density of
the Sun, or more than 300,000 g/cm3. A teaspoonful of this material would have a mass of some 1.6 tons! At
such enormous densities, matter cannot exist in its usual state; we will examine the particular behavior of this
type of matter in The Death of Stars. For now, we just note that white dwarfs are dying stars, reaching the end
of their productive lives and ready for their stories to be over.
The British astrophysicist (and science popularizer) Arthur Eddington (1882–1944) described the first known
white dwarf this way:
The message of the companion of Sirius, when decoded, ran: “I am composed of material three thousand
times denser than anything you’ve ever come across. A ton of my material would be a little nugget you could
put in a matchbox.” What reply could one make to something like that? Well, the reply most of us made in
1914 was, “Shut up; don’t talk nonsense.”
Today, however, astronomers not only accept that stars as dense as white dwarfs exist but (as we will see)
have found even denser and stranger objects in their quest to understand the evolution of different types of
stars.
Use this interactive H-R diagram (https://openstax.org/l/30interhr) to explore the sizes of stars based on
their placement. Overlay the closest stars and the brightest stars, and consider where they lie on the figure.
How many stars are among both the closest and brightest stars?
LINK TO LEARNING
18.4 • The H–R Diagram
Key Terms
binary stars
two stars that revolve about each other
brown dwarf
an object intermediate in size between a planet and a star; the approximate mass range is
from about 1/100 of the mass of the Sun up to the lower mass limit for self-sustaining nuclear reactions,
which is about 1/12 the mass of the Sun
eclipsing binary
a binary star in which the plane of revolution of the two stars is nearly edge-on to our line
of sight, so that the light of one star is periodically diminished by the other passing in front of it
H–R diagram
(Hertzsprung–Russell diagram) a plot of luminosity against surface temperature (or spectral
type) for a group of stars
main sequence
a sequence of stars on the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram, containing the majority of stars,
that runs diagonally from the upper left to the lower right
mass-luminosity relation
the observed relation between the masses and luminosities of many (90% of all)
stars
selection effect
the selection of sample data in a nonrandom way, causing the sample data to be
unrepresentative of the entire data set
spectroscopic binary
a binary star in which the components are not resolved but whose binary nature is
indicated by periodic variations in radial velocity, indicating orbital motion
visual binary
a binary star in which the two components are telescopically resolved
white dwarf
a low-mass star that has exhausted most or all of its nuclear fuel and has collapsed to a very
small size; such a star is near its final state of life
Summary
18.1 A Stellar Census
To understand the properties of stars, we must make wide-ranging surveys. We find the stars that appear
brightest to our eyes are bright primarily because they are intrinsically very luminous, not because they are
the closest to us. Most of the nearest stars are intrinsically so faint that they can be seen only with the aid of a
telescope. Stars with low mass and low luminosity are much more common than stars with high mass and
high luminosity. Most of the brown dwarfs in the local neighborhood have not yet been discovered.
18.2 Measuring Stellar Masses
The masses of stars can be determined by analysis of the orbit of binary stars—two stars that orbit a common
center of mass. In visual binaries, the two stars can be seen separately in a telescope, whereas in a
spectroscopic binary, only the spectrum reveals the presence of two stars. Stellar masses range from about 1/
12 to more than 100 times the mass of the Sun (in rare cases, going to 250 times the Sun’s mass). Objects with
masses between 1/12 and 1/100 that of the Sun are called brown dwarfs. Objects in which no nuclear reactions
can take place are planets. The most massive stars are, in most cases, also the most luminous, and this
correlation is known as the mass-luminosity relation.
18.3 Diameters of Stars
The diameters of stars can be determined by measuring the time it takes an object (the Moon, a planet, or a
companion star) to pass in front of it and block its light. Diameters of members of eclipsing binary systems
(where the stars pass in front of each other) can be determined through analysis of their orbital motions.
18.4 The H–R Diagram
The Hertzsprung–Russell diagram, or H–R diagram, is a plot of stellar luminosity against surface temperature.
Most stars lie on the main sequence, which extends diagonally across the H–R diagram from high temperature
and high luminosity to low temperature and low luminosity. The position of a star along the main sequence is
determined by its mass. High-mass stars emit more energy and are hotter than low-mass stars on the main
18 • Key Terms
sequence. Main-sequence stars derive their energy from the fusion of protons to helium. About 90% of the
stars lie on the main sequence. Only about 10% of the stars are white dwarfs, and fewer than 1% are giants or
supergiants.
For Further Exploration
Articles
Croswell, K. “The Periodic Table of the Cosmos.” Scientific American (July 2011):45–49. A brief introduction to
the history and uses of the H–R diagram.
Davis, J. “Measuring the Stars.” Sky & Telescope (October 1991): 361. The article explains direct measurements
of stellar diameters.
DeVorkin, D. “Henry Norris Russell.” Scientific American (May 1989): 126.
Kaler, J. “Journeys on the H–R Diagram.” Sky & Telescope (May 1988): 483.
McAllister, H. “Twenty Years of Seeing Double.” Sky & Telescope (November 1996): 28. An update on modern
studies of binary stars.
Parker, B. “Those Amazing White Dwarfs.” Astronomy (July 1984): 15. The article focuses on the history of their
discovery.
Pasachoff, J. “The H–R Diagram’s 100th Anniversary.” Sky & Telescope (June 2014): 32.
Roth, J., and Sinnott, R. “Our Studies of Celestial Neighbors.” Sky & Telescope (October 1996): 32. A discussion
is provided on finding the nearest stars.
Websites
Eclipsing Binary Stars: http://www.midnightkite.com/index.aspx?URL=Binary (http://www.midnightkite.com/
index.aspx?URL=Binary). Dan Bruton at Austin State University has created this collection of animations,
articles, and links showing how astronomers use eclipsing binary light curves.
Henry Norris Russell: http://www.phys-astro.sonoma.edu/brucemedalists/russell/RussellBio.pdf
(http://www.phys-astro.sonoma.edu/brucemedalists/russell/RussellBio.pdf). A Bruce Medal profile of Russell.
Hertzsprung–Russell Diagram: http://skyserver.sdss.org/dr1/en/proj/advanced/hr/ (http://skyserver.sdss.org/
dr1/en/proj/advanced/hr/). This site from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey introduces the H–R diagram and gives
you information for making your own. You can go step by step by using the menu at the left. Note that in the
project instructions, the word “here” is a link and takes you to the data you need.
Stars of the Week: http://stars.astro.illinois.edu/sow/sowlist.html (http://stars.astro.illinois.edu/sow/
sowlist.html). Astronomer James Kaler does “biographical summaries” of famous stars—not the Hollywood
type, but ones in the real sky.
Videos
Constructing a Hertzsprung-Russell Diagram for a Globular Star Cluster: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=HWQslu4S5eQ (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HWQslu4S5eQ).
WISE Mission Surveys Nearby Stars: http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/video/details.php?id=1089
(http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/video/details.php?id=1089). Short video about the WISE telescope survey of brown
dwarfs and M dwarfs in our immediate neighborhood (1:21).
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
Two stars are seen close together in the sky, and your group is given the task of determining whether they
18 • For Further Exploration
are a visual binary or whether they just happen to be seen in nearly the same direction. You have access to
a good observatory. Make a list of the types of measurements you would make to determine whether they
orbit each other.
B.
Your group is given information about five main sequence stars that are among the brightest-appearing
stars in the sky and yet are pretty far away. Where would these stars be on the H–R diagram and why?
Next, your group is given information about five main-sequence stars that are typical of the stars closest
to us. Where would these stars be on the H–R diagram and why?
C.
A very wealthy (but eccentric) alumnus of your college donates a lot of money for a fund that will help in
the search for more brown dwarfs. Your group is the committee in charge of this fund. How would you
spend the money? (Be as specific as you can, listing instruments and observing programs.)
D.
Use the internet to search for information about the stars with the largest known diameter. What star is
considered the record holder (this changes as new measurements are made)? Read about some of the
largest stars on the web. Can your group list some reasons why it might be hard to know which star is the
largest?
E.
Use the internet to search for information about stars with the largest mass. What star is the current
“mass champion” among stars? Try to research how the mass of one or more of the most massive stars
was measured, and report to the group or the whole class.
Exercises
Review Questions
1. How does the mass of the Sun compare with that of other stars in our local neighborhood?
2. Name and describe the three types of binary systems.
3. Describe two ways of determining the diameter of a star.
4. What are the largest- and smallest-known values of the mass, luminosity, surface temperature, and
diameter of stars (roughly)?
5. You are able to take spectra of both stars in an eclipsing binary system. List all properties of the stars that
can be measured from their spectra and light curves.
6. Sketch an H–R diagram. Label the axes. Show where cool supergiants, white dwarfs, the Sun, and mainsequence stars are found.
7. Describe what a typical star in the Galaxy would be like compared to the Sun.
8. How do we distinguish stars from brown dwarfs? How do we distinguish brown dwarfs from planets?
9. Describe how the mass, luminosity, surface temperature, and radius of main-sequence stars change in
value going from the “bottom” to the “top” of the main sequence.
10. One method to measure the diameter of a star is to use an object like the Moon or a planet to block out its
light and to measure the time it takes to cover up the object. Why is this method used more often with the
Moon rather than the planets, even though there are more planets?
11. We discussed in the chapter that about half of stars come in pairs, or multiple star systems, yet the first
eclipsing binary was not discovered until the eighteenth century. Why?
Thought Questions
12. Is the Sun an average star? Why or why not?
18 • Exercises
13. Suppose you want to determine the average educational level of people throughout the nation. Since it
would be a great deal of work to survey every citizen, you decide to make your task easier by asking only
the people on your campus. Will you get an accurate answer? Will your survey be distorted by a selection
effect? Explain.
14. Why do most known visual binaries have relatively long periods and most spectroscopic binaries have
relatively short periods?
15. Figure 18.11 shows the light curve of a hypothetical eclipsing binary star in which the light of one star is
completely blocked by another. What would the light curve look like for a system in which the light of the
smaller star is only partially blocked by the larger one? Assume the smaller star is the hotter one. Sketch
the relative positions of the two stars that correspond to various portions of the light curve.
16. There are fewer eclipsing binaries than spectroscopic binaries. Explain why.
17. Within 50 light-years of the Sun, visual binaries outnumber eclipsing binaries. Why?
18. Which is easier to observe at large distances—a spectroscopic binary or a visual binary?
19. The eclipsing binary Algol drops from maximum to minimum brightness in about 4 hours, remains at
minimum brightness for 20 minutes, and then takes another 4 hours to return to maximum brightness.
Assume that we view this system exactly edge-on, so that one star crosses directly in front of the other. Is
one star much larger than the other, or are they fairly similar in size? (Hint: Refer to the diagrams of
eclipsing binary light curves.)
20. Review this spectral data for five stars.
Table A
Star
Spectrum
G, main sequence
K, giant
K, main sequence
O, main sequence
M, main sequence
Which is the hottest? Coolest? Most luminous? Least luminous? In each case, give your reasoning.
21. Which changes by the largest factor along the main sequence from spectral types O to M—mass or
luminosity?
22. Suppose you want to search for brown dwarfs using a space telescope. Will you design your telescope to
detect light in the ultraviolet or the infrared part of the spectrum? Why?
23. An astronomer discovers a type-M star with a large luminosity. How is this possible? What kind of star is
it?
24. Approximately 9000 stars are bright enough to be seen without a telescope. Are any of these white
dwarfs? Use the information given in this chapter to explain your reasoning.
18 • Exercises
25. Use the data in Appendix J to plot an H–R diagram for the brightest stars. Use the data from Table 18.3 to
show where the main sequence lies. Do 90% of the brightest stars lie on or near the main sequence?
Explain why or why not.
26. Use the diagram you have drawn for Exercise 18.25 to answer the following questions: Which star is more
massive—Sirius or Alpha Centauri? Rigel and Regulus have nearly the same spectral type. Which is larger?
Rigel and Betelgeuse have nearly the same luminosity. Which is larger? Which is redder?
27. Use the data in Appendix I to plot an H–R diagram for this sample of nearby stars. How does this plot
differ from the one for the brightest stars in Exercise 18.25? Why?
28. If a visual binary system were to have two equal-mass stars, how would they be located relative to the
center of the mass of the system? What would you observe as you watched these stars as they orbited the
center of mass, assuming very circular orbits, and assuming the orbit was face on to your view?
29. Two stars are in a visual binary star system that we see face on. One star is very massive whereas the
other is much less massive. Assuming circular orbits, describe their relative orbits in terms of orbit size,
period, and orbital velocity.
30. Describe the spectra for a spectroscopic binary for a system comprised of an F-type and L-type star.
Assume that the system is too far away to be able to easily observe the L-type star.
31. Figure 18.7 shows the velocity of two stars in a spectroscopic binary system. Which star is the most
massive? Explain your reasoning.
32. You go out stargazing one night, and someone asks you how far away the brightest stars we see in the sky
without a telescope are. What would be a good, general response? (Use Appendix J for more information.)
33. If you were to compare three stars with the same surface temperature, with one star being a giant,
another a supergiant, and the third a main-sequence star, how would their radii compare to one another?
34. Are supergiant stars also extremely massive? Explain the reasoning behind your answer.
35. Consider the following data on four stars:
Table B
Star
Luminosity (in LSun)
Type
B, main sequence
1/100
B, white dwarf
1/100
M, main sequence
M, giant
Which star would have the largest radius? Which star would have the smallest radius? Which star is the
most common in our area of the Galaxy? Which star is the least common?
Figuring for Yourself
36. If two stars are in a binary system with a combined mass of 5.5 solar masses and an orbital period of 12
years, what is the average distance between the two stars?
18 • Exercises
37. It is possible that stars as much as 200 times the Sun’s mass or more exist. What is the luminosity of such
a star based upon the mass-luminosity relation?
38. The lowest mass for a true star is 1/12 the mass of the Sun. What is the luminosity of such a star based
upon the mass-luminosity relationship?
39. Spectral types are an indicator of temperature. For the first 10 stars in Appendix J, the list of the brightest
stars in our skies, estimate their temperatures from their spectral types. Use information in the figures
and/or tables in this chapter and describe how you made the estimates.
40. We can estimate the masses of most of the stars in Appendix J from the mass-luminosity relationship in
Figure 18.9. However, remember this relationship works only for main sequence stars. Determine which of
the first 10 stars in Appendix J are main sequence stars. Use one of the figures in this chapter. Make a
table of stars’ masses.
41. In Diameters of Stars, the relative diameters of the two stars in the Sirius system were determined. Let’s
use this value to explore other aspects of this system. This will be done through several steps, each in its
own exercise. Assume the temperature of the Sun is 5800 K, and the temperature of Sirius A, the larger
star of the binary, is
10,000 K. The luminosity of Sirius A can be found in Appendix J, and is given as about 23 times that of the
Sun. Using the values provided, calculate the radius of Sirius A relative to that of the Sun.
42. Now calculate the radius of Sirius’ white dwarf companion, Sirius B, to the Sun.
43. How does this radius of Sirius B compare with that of Earth?
44. From the previous calculations and the results from Diameters of Stars, it is possible to calculate the
density of Sirius B relative to the Sun. It is worth noting that the radius of the companion is very similar to
that of Earth, whereas the mass is very similar to the Sun’s. How does the companion’s density compare
to that of the Sun? Recall that density = mass/volume, and the volume of a sphere = (4/3)πR3. How does
this density compare with that of water and other materials discussed in this text? Can you see why
astronomers were so surprised and puzzled when they first determined the orbit of the companion to
Sirius?
45. How much would you weigh if you were suddenly transported to the white dwarf Sirius B? You may use
your own weight (or if don’t want to own up to what it is, assume you weigh 70 kg or 150 lb). In this case,
assume that the companion to Sirius has a mass equal to that of the Sun and a radius equal to that of
Earth. Remember Newton’s law of gravity:
and that your weight is proportional to the force that you feel. What kind of star should you travel to if you
want to lose weight (and not gain it)?
46. The star Betelgeuse has a temperature of 3400 K and a luminosity of 13,200 LSun. Calculate the radius of
Betelgeuse relative to the Sun.
47. Using the information provided in Table 18.1, what is the average stellar density in our part of the Galaxy?
Use only the true stars (types O–M) and assume a spherical distribution with radius of 26 light-years.
48. Confirm that the angular diameter of the Sun of 1/2° corresponds to a linear diameter of 1.39 million km.
Use the average distance of the Sun and Earth to derive the answer. (Hint: This can be solved using a
trigonometric function.)
18 • Exercises
49. An eclipsing binary star system is observed with the following contact times for the main eclipse:
Table C
Contact
Time
Date
First contact
12:00 p.m.
March 12
Second contact
4:00 p.m.
March 13
Third contact
9:00 a.m.
March 18
Fourth contact
1:00 p.m.
March 19
The orbital velocity of the smaller star relative to the larger is 62,000 km/h. Determine the diameters for
each star in the system.
50. If a 100 solar mass star were to have a luminosity of 107 times the Sun’s luminosity, how would such a
star’s density compare when it is on the main sequence as an O-type star, and when it is a cool supergiant
(M-type)? Use values of temperature from Figure 18.14 or Figure 18.15 and the relationship between
luminosity, radius, and temperature as given in Exercise 18.47.
51. If Betelgeuse had a mass that was 25 times that of the Sun, how would its average density compare to
that of the Sun? Use the definition of
, where the volume is that of a sphere.
18 • Exercises
