Figure 20.1 NGC 3603 and Its Parent Cloud. This image, taken by the Hubble Space Telescope, shows the young star cluster
NGC 3603 interacting with the cloud of gas from which it recently formed. The bright blue stars of the cluster have blown a bubble in
the gas cloud. The remains of this cloud can be seen in the lower right part of the frame, glowing in response to the starlight
illuminating it. In its darker parts, shielded from the harsh light of NGC 3603, new stars continue to form. Although the stars of NGC
3603 formed only recently, the most massive of them are already dying and ejecting their mass, producing the blue ring and streak
features visible in the upper left part of the image. Thus, this image shows the full life cycle of stars, from formation out of
interstellar gas, through life on the main sequence, to death and the return of stellar matter to interstellar space. (credit:
modification of work by NASA, Wolfgang Brandner (JPL/IPAC), Eva K. Grebel (University of Washington), You-Hua Chu (University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign))
Chapter Outline
20.1 The Interstellar Medium
20.2 Interstellar Gas
20.3 Cosmic Dust
20.4 Cosmic Rays
20.5 The Life Cycle of Cosmic Material
20.6 Interstellar Matter around the Sun
Thinking Ahead
Where do stars come from? We already know from earlier chapters that stars must die because ultimately they
exhaust their nuclear fuel. We might hypothesize that new stars come into existence to replace the ones that
die. In order to form new stars, however, we need the raw material to make them. It also turns out that stars
eject mass throughout their lives (a kind of wind blows from their surface layers) and that material must go
somewhere. What does this “raw material” of stars look like? How would you detect it, especially if it is not yet
in the form of stars and cannot generate its own energy?
One of the most exciting discoveries of twentieth-century astronomy was that our Galaxy contains vast
quantities of this “raw material”—atoms or molecules of gas and tiny solid dust particles found between the
stars. Studying this diffuse matter between the stars helps us understand how new stars form and gives us
important clues about our own origins billions of years ago.
Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
20 • Thinking Ahead
20.1
The Interstellar Medium
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how much interstellar matter there is in the Milky Way, and what its typical density is
Describe how the interstellar medium is divided into gaseous and solid components
Astronomers refer to all the material between stars as interstellar matter; the entire collection of interstellar
matter is called the interstellar medium (ISM). Some interstellar material is concentrated into giant clouds,
each of which is known as a nebula (plural “nebulae,” Latin for “clouds”). The best-known nebulae are the
ones that we can see glowing or reflecting visible light; there are many pictures of these in this chapter.
Interstellar clouds do not last for the lifetime of the universe. Instead, they are like clouds on Earth, constantly
shifting, merging with each other, growing, or dispersing. Some become dense and massive enough to
collapse under their own gravity, forming new stars. When stars die, they, in turn, eject some of their material
into interstellar space. This material can then form new clouds and begin the cycle over again.
About 99% of the material between the stars is in the form of a gas—that is, it consists of individual atoms or
molecules. The most abundant elements in this gas are hydrogen and helium (which we saw are also the most
abundant elements in the stars), but the gas also includes other elements. Some of the gas is in the form of
molecules—combinations of atoms. The remaining 1% of the interstellar material is solid—frozen particles
consisting of many atoms and molecules that are called interstellar grains or interstellar dust (Figure 20.2). A
typical dust grain consists of a core of rocklike material (silicates) or graphite surrounded by a mantle of ices;
water, methane, and ammonia are probably the most abundant ices.
Figure 20.2 Various Types of Interstellar Matter. The reddish nebulae in this spectacular photograph glow with light emitted by
hydrogen atoms. The darkest areas are clouds of dust that block the light from stars behind them. The upper part of the picture is
filled with the bluish glow of light reflected from hot stars embedded in the outskirts of a huge, cool cloud of dust and gas. The cool
supergiant star Antares can be seen as a big, reddish patch in the lower-left part of the picture. The star is shedding some of its outer
atmosphere and is surrounded by a cloud of its own making that reflects the red light of the star. The red nebula in the middle right
partially surrounds the star Sigma Scorpii. (To the right of Antares, you can see M4, a much more distant cluster of extremely old
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
stars.) (credit: modification of work by ESO/Digitized Sky Survey 2)
If all the interstellar gas within the Galaxy were spread out smoothly, there would be only about one atom of
gas per cm3 in interstellar space. (In contrast, the air in the room where you are reading this book has roughly
1019 atoms per cm3.) The dust grains are even scarcer. A km3 of space would contain only a few hundred to a
few thousand tiny grains, each typically less than one ten-thousandth of a millimeter in diameter. These
numbers are just averages, however, because the gas and dust are distributed in a patchy and irregular way,
much as water vapor in Earth’s atmosphere is often concentrated into clouds.
In some interstellar clouds, the density of gas and dust may exceed the average by as much as a thousand
times or more, but even this density is more nearly a vacuum than any we can make on Earth. To show what
we mean, let’s imagine a vertical tube of air reaching from the ground to the top of Earth’s atmosphere with a
cross-section of 1 square meter. Now let us extend the same-size tube from the top of the atmosphere all the
way to the edge of the observable universe—over 10 billion light-years away. Long though it is, the second
tube would still contain fewer atoms than the one in our planet’s atmosphere.
While the density of interstellar matter is very low, the volume of space in which such matter is found is huge,
and so its total mass is substantial. To see why, we must bear in mind that stars occupy only a tiny fraction of
the volume of the Milky Way Galaxy. For example, it takes light only about four seconds to travel a distance
equal to the diameter of the Sun, but more than four years to travel from the Sun to the nearest star. Even
though the spaces among the stars are sparsely populated, there’s a lot of space out there!
Astronomers estimate that the total mass of gas and dust in the Milky Way Galaxy is equal to about 15% of the
mass contained in stars. This means that the mass of the interstellar matter in our Galaxy amounts to about 10
billion times the mass of the Sun. There is plenty of raw material in the Galaxy to make generations of new
stars and planets (and perhaps even astronomy students).
E X A M P L E 2 0 . 1
Estimating Interstellar Mass
You can make a rough estimate of how much interstellar mass our Galaxy contains and also how many new
stars could be made from this interstellar matter. All you need to know is how big the Galaxy is and the
average density using this formula:
You have to remember to use consistent units—such as meters and kilograms. We will assume that our
Galaxy is shaped like a cylinder; the volume of a cylinder equals the area of its base times its height
where R is the radius of the cylinder and h is its height.
Suppose that the average density of hydrogen gas in our Galaxy is one atom per cm3. Each hydrogen atom
has a mass of 1.7 × 10−27 kg. If the Galaxy is a cylinder with a diameter of 100,000 light-years and a height of
300 light-years, what is the mass of this gas? How many solar-mass stars (2.0 × 1030 kg) could be produced
from this mass of gas if it were all turned into stars?
Solution
If the diameter of the Galaxy is 100,000 light-years, then the radius is 50,000 light-years. Recall that 1 lightyear = 9.5 × 1012 km = 9.5 × 1017 cm, so the volume of the Galaxy is
The total mass is therefore
20.1 • The Interstellar Medium
This is sufficient to make
stars equal in mass to the Sun. That’s roughly 2 billion stars.
Check Your Learning
You can use the same method to estimate the mass of interstellar gas around the Sun. The distance from
the Sun to the nearest other star, Proxima Centauri, is 4.2 light-years. We will see in Interstellar Matter
around the Sun that the gas in the immediate vicinity of the Sun is less dense than average, about 0.1
atoms per cm3. What is the total mass of interstellar hydrogen in a sphere centered on the Sun and
extending out to Proxima Centauri? How does this compare to the mass of the Sun? It is helpful to
remember that the volume of a sphere is related to its radius:
Answer:
The volume of a sphere stretching from the Sun to Proxima Centauri is:
Therefore, the mass of hydrogen in this sphere is:
This is only (4.5 × 1028 kg)/(2.0 × 1030 kg) = 2.2% the mass of the Sun.
Naming the Nebulae
As you look at the captions for some of the spectacular photographs in this chapter and The Birth of Stars
and the Discovery of Planets outside the Solar System, you will notice the variety of names given to the
nebulae. A few, which in small telescopes look like something recognizable, are sometimes named after the
creatures or objects they resemble. Examples include the Crab, Tarantula, and Keyhole Nebulae. But most
have only numbers that are entries in a catalog of astronomical objects.
Perhaps the best-known catalog of nebulae (as well as star clusters and galaxies) was compiled by the
French astronomer Charles Messier (1730–1817). Messier’s passion was discovering comets, and his
devotion to this cause earned him the nickname “The Comet Ferret” from King Louis XV. When comets are
first seen coming toward the Sun, they look like little fuzzy patches of light; in small telescopes, they are
easy to confuse with nebulae or with groupings of many stars so far away that their light is all blended
together. Time and again, Messier’s heart leapt as he thought he had discovered one of his treasured
comets, only to find that he had “merely” observed a nebula or cluster.
In frustration, Messier set out to catalog the position and appearance of over 100 objects that could be
mistaken for comets. For him, this list was merely a tool in the far more important work of comet hunting.
He would be very surprised if he returned today to discover that no one recalls his comets anymore, but his
catalog of “fuzzy things that are not comets” is still widely used. When Figure 20.2 refers to M4, it denotes
the fourth entry in Messier’s list. Visit https://www.nasa.gov/content/goddard/hubble-s-messier-catalog
ASTRONOMY BASICS
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
(https://www.nasa.gov/content/goddard/hubble-s-messier-catalog) for a gallery of M objects as
photographed with the Hubble Space Telescope.
A far more extensive listing was compiled under the title of the New General Catalog (NGC) of Nebulae and
Star Clusters in 1888 by John Dreyer, working at the observatory in Armagh, Ireland. He based his
compilation on the work of William Herschel and his son John, plus many other observers who followed
them. With the addition of two further listings (called the Index Catalogs), Dreyer’s compilation eventually
included 13,000 objects. Astronomers today still use his NGC numbers when referring to most nebulae and
star groups.
20.2
Interstellar Gas
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Name the major types of interstellar gas
Discuss how we can observe each type
Describe the temperature and other major properties of each type
Interstellar gas, depending on where it is located, can be as cold as a few degrees above absolute zero or as
hot as a million degrees or more. We will begin our voyage through the interstellar medium by exploring the
different conditions under which we find gas.
Ionized Hydrogen (H II) Regions—Gas Near Hot Stars
Some of the most spectacular astronomical photographs show interstellar gas located near hot stars (Figure
20.3). The strongest line in the visible region of the hydrogen spectrum is the red line in the Balmer series1 (as
explained in the chapter on Radiation and Spectra); this emission line accounts for the characteristic red glow
in images like Figure 20.3.
Figure 20.3 Orion Nebula. The red glow that pervades the great Orion Nebula is produced by the first line in the Balmer series of
hydrogen. Hydrogen emission indicates that there are hot young stars nearby that ionize these clouds of gas. When electrons then
recombine with protons and move back down into lower energy orbits, emission lines are produced. The blue color seen at the
edges of some of the clouds is produced by small particles of dust that scatter the light from the hot stars. Dust can also be seen
Scientists also call this red Balmer line the H-alpha line, with alpha meaning it is the first spectral line in the Balmer series.
20.2 • Interstellar Gas
silhouetted against the glowing gas. (credit: NASA,ESA, M. Robberto (Space Telescope Science Institute/ESA) and the Hubble Space
Telescope Orion Treasury Project Team)
Hot stars are able to heat nearby gas to temperatures close to 10,000 K. The ultraviolet radiation from the stars
also ionizes the hydrogen (remember that during ionization, the electron is stripped completely away from the
proton). Such a detached proton won’t remain alone forever when attractive electrons are around; it will
capture a free electron, becoming a neutral hydrogen once more. However, such a neutral atom can then
absorb ultraviolet radiation again and start the cycle over. At a typical moment, most of the atoms near a hot
star are in the ionized state.
Since hydrogen is the main constituent of interstellar gas, we often characterize a region of space according to
whether its hydrogen is neutral or ionized. A cloud of ionized hydrogen is called an H II region. (Scientists who
work with spectra use the Roman numeral I to indicate that an atom is neutral; successively higher Roman
numerals are used for each higher stage of ionization. H II thus refers to hydrogen that has lost its one
electron; Fe III is iron with two electrons missing.)
The electrons that are captured by the hydrogen nuclei cascade down through the various energy levels of the
hydrogen atoms on their way to the lowest level, or ground state. During each transition downward, they give
up energy in the form of light. The process of converting ultraviolet radiation into visible light is called
fluorescence. Interstellar gas contains other elements besides hydrogen. Many of them are also ionized in the
vicinity of hot stars; they then capture electrons and emit light, just as hydrogen does, allowing them to be
observed by astronomers. But generally, the red hydrogen line is the strongest, and that is why H II regions
look red.
A fluorescent light on Earth works using the same principles as a fluorescent H II region. When you turn on the
current, electrons collide with atoms of mercury vapor in the tube. The mercury is excited to a high-energy
state because of these collisions. When the electrons in the mercury atoms return to lower-energy levels, some
of the energy they emit is in the form of ultraviolet photons. These, in turn, strike a phosphor-coated screen on
the inner wall of the light tube. The atoms in the screen absorb the ultraviolet photons and emit visible light as
they cascade downward among the energy levels. (The difference is that these atoms give off a wider range of
light colors, which mix to give the characteristic white glow of fluorescent lights, whereas the hydrogen atoms
in an H II region give off a more limited set of colors.)
Neutral Hydrogen Clouds
The very hot stars required to produce H II regions are rare, and only a small fraction of interstellar matter is
close enough to such hot stars to be ionized by them. Most of the volume of the interstellar medium is filled
with neutral (nonionized) hydrogen. How do we go about looking for it?
Unfortunately, neutral hydrogen atoms at temperatures typical of the gas in interstellar space neither emit nor
absorb light in the visible part of the spectrum. Nor, for the most part, do the other trace elements that are
mixed with the interstellar hydrogen. However, some of these other elements can absorb visible light even at
typical interstellar temperatures. This means that when we observe a bright source such as a hot star or a
galaxy, we can sometimes see additional lines in its spectrum produced when interstellar gas absorbs light at
particular frequencies (see Figure 20.4). Some of the strongest interstellar absorption lines are produced by
calcium and sodium, but many other elements can be detected as well in sufficiently sensitive observations (as
discussed in Radiation and Spectra).
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
Figure 20.4 Absorption Lines though an Interstellar Dust Cloud. When there is a significant amount of cool interstellar matter
(gas with some dust) between us and a star, we can see the absorption lines of the gas in the star’s spectrum. We can distinguish the
two kinds of lines because, whereas the star’s lines are broad, the lines from the gas are narrower.
The first evidence for absorption by interstellar clouds came from the analysis of a spectroscopic binary star
(see The Stars: A Celestial Census), published in 1904. While most of the lines in the spectrum of this binary
shifted alternately from longer to shorter wavelengths and back again, as we would expect from the Doppler
effect for stars in orbit around each other, a few lines in the spectrum remained fixed in wavelength. Since
both stars are moving in a binary system, lines that showed no motion puzzled astronomers. The lines were
also peculiar in that they were much, much narrower than the rest of the lines, indicating that the gas
producing them was at a very low pressure. Subsequent work demonstrated that these lines were not formed
in the star’s atmosphere at all, but rather in a cold cloud of gas located between Earth and the binary star.
While these and similar observations proved there was interstellar gas, they could not yet detect hydrogen, the
most common element, due to its lack of spectral features in the visible part of the spectrum. (The Balmer line
of hydrogen is in the visible range, but only excited hydrogen atoms produce it. In the cold interstellar
medium, the hydrogen atoms are all in the ground state and no electrons are in the higher-energy levels
required to produce either emission or absorption lines in the Balmer series.) Direct detection of hydrogen
had to await the development of telescopes capable of seeing very-low-energy changes in hydrogen atoms in
other parts of the spectrum. The first such observations were made using radio telescopes, and radio emission
and absorption by interstellar hydrogen remains one of our main tools for studying the vast amounts of cold
hydrogen in the universe to this day.
In 1944, while he was still a student, the Dutch astronomer Hendrik van de Hulst predicted that hydrogen
would produce a strong line at a wavelength of 21 centimeters. That’s quite a long wavelength, implying that
the wave has such a low frequency and low energy that it cannot come from electrons jumping between
energy levels (as we discussed in Radiation and Spectra). Instead, energy is emitted when the electron does a
flip, something like an acrobat in a circus flipping upright after standing on his head.
The flip works like this: a hydrogen atom consists of a proton and an electron bound together. Both the proton
and the electron act is if they were spinning like tops, and spin axes of the two tops can either be pointed in
the same direction (aligned) or in opposite directions (anti-aligned). If the proton and electron were spinning
in opposite directions, the atom as a whole would have a very slightly lower energy than if the two spins were
aligned (Figure 20.5). If an atom in the lower-energy state (spins opposed) acquired a small amount of energy,
then the spins of the proton and electron could be aligned, leaving the atom in a slightly excited state. If the
atom then lost that same amount of energy again, it would return to its ground state. The amount of energy
involved corresponds to a wave with a wavelength of 21 centimeters; hence, it is known as the 21-centimeter
line.
20.2 • Interstellar Gas
Figure 20.5 Formation of the 21-Centimeter Line. When the electron in a hydrogen atom is in the orbit closest to the nucleus, the
proton and the electron may be spinning either (a) in the same direction or (b) in opposite directions. When the electron flips over,
the atom gains or loses a tiny bit of energy by either absorbing or emitting electromagnetic energy with a wavelength of 21
centimeters.
Neutral hydrogen atoms can acquire small amounts of energy through collisions with other hydrogen atoms
or with free electrons. Such collisions are extremely rare in the sparse gases of interstellar space. An individual
atom may wait centuries before such an encounter aligns the spins of its proton and electron. Nevertheless,
over many millions of years, a significant fraction of the hydrogen atoms are excited by a collision. (Out there
in cold space, that’s about as much excitement as an atom typically experiences.)
An excited atom can later lose its excess energy either by colliding with another particle or by giving off a radio
wave with a wavelength of 21 centimeters. If there are no collisions, an excited hydrogen atom will wait an
average of about 10 million years before emitting a photon and returning to its state of lowest energy. Even
though the probability that any single atom will emit a photon is low, there are so many hydrogen atoms in a
typical gas cloud that collectively they will produce an observable line at 21 centimeters.
Equipment sensitive enough to detect the 21-cm line of neutral hydrogen became available in 1951. Dutch
astronomers had built an instrument to detect the 21-cm waves that they had predicted, but a fire destroyed it.
As a result, two Harvard physicists, Harold Ewen and Edward Purcell, made the first detection (Figure 20.6),
soon followed by confirmations from the Dutch and a group in Australia. Since the detection of the 21-cm line,
many other radio lines produced by both atoms and molecules have been discovered (as we will discuss in a
moment), and these have allowed astronomers to map out the neutral gas throughout our home Galaxy.
Astronomers have also detected neutral interstellar gas, including hydrogen, at many other wavelengths from
the infrared to the ultraviolet.
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
Figure 20.6 Harold Ewen (1922–2015) and Edward Purcell (1912–1997). We see Harold Ewen in 1952 working with the horn antenna
(atop the physics laboratory at Harvard) that made the first detection of interstellar 21-cm radiation. The inset shows Edward Purcell,
the winner of the 1952 Nobel Prize in physics, a few years later. (credit: modification of work by NRAO)
Modern radio observations show that most of the neutral hydrogen in our Galaxy is confined to an extremely
flat layer, less than 300 light-years thick, that extends throughout the disk of the Milky Way Galaxy. This gas
has densities ranging from about 0.1 to about 100 atoms per cm3, and it exists at a wide range of
temperatures, from as low as about 100 K (–173 °C) to as high as about 8000 K. These regions of warm and
cold gas are interspersed with each other, and the density and temperature at any particular point in space
are constantly changing.
Ultra-Hot Interstellar Gas
While the temperatures of 10,000 K found in H II regions might seem warm, they are not the hottest phase of
the interstellar medium. Some of the interstellar gas is at a temperature of a million degrees, even though
there is no visible source of heat nearby. The discovery of this ultra-hot interstellar gas was a big surprise.
Before the launch of astronomical observatories into space, which could see radiation in the ultraviolet and Xray parts of the spectrum, astronomers assumed that most of the region between stars was filled with
hydrogen at temperatures no warmer than those found in H II regions. But telescopes launched above Earth’s
atmosphere obtained ultraviolet spectra that contained interstellar lines produced by oxygen atoms that have
been ionized five times. To strip five electrons from their orbits around an oxygen nucleus requires a lot of
energy. Subsequent observations with orbiting X-ray telescopes revealed that the Galaxy is filled with
numerous bubbles of X-ray-emitting gas. To emit X-rays, and to contain oxygen atoms that have been ionized
five times, gas must be heated to temperatures of a million degrees or more.
Theorists have now shown that the source of energy producing these remarkable temperatures is the
explosion of massive stars at the ends of their lives (Figure 20.7). Such explosions, called supernovae, will be
discussed in detail in the chapter on The Death of Stars. For now, we’ll just say that some stars, nearing the
ends of their lives, become unstable and literally explode. These explosions launch gas into interstellar space
at velocities of tens of thousands of kilometers per second (up to about 30% the speed of light). When this
ejected gas collides with interstellar gas, it produces shocks that heat the gas to millions or tens of millions of
degrees.
20.2 • Interstellar Gas
Figure 20.7 Vela Supernova Remnant. About 11,000 years ago, a dying star in the constellation of Vela exploded, becoming as
bright as the full moon in Earth’s skies. You can see the faint rounded filaments from that explosion in the center of this colorful
image. The edges of the remnant are colliding with the interstellar medium, heating the gas they plow through to temperatures of
millions of K. Telescopes in space also reveal a glowing sphere of X-ray radiation from the remnant. (credit: Digitized Sky Survey, ESA/
ESO/NASA FITS Liberator, Davide De Martin)
Astronomers estimate that one supernova explodes roughly every 100 years somewhere in the Galaxy. On
average, shocks launched by supernovae sweep through any given point in the Galaxy about once every few
million years. These shocks keep some interstellar space filled with gas at temperatures of millions of degrees,
and they continually disturb the colder gas, keeping it in constant, turbulent motion.
Molecular Clouds
A few simple molecules out in space, such as CN and CH, were discovered decades ago because they produce
absorption lines in the visible-light spectra of stars behind them. When more sophisticated equipment for
obtaining spectra in radio and infrared wavelengths became available, astronomers—to their surprise—found
much more complex molecules in interstellar clouds as well.
Just as atoms leave their “fingerprints” in the spectrum of visible light, so the vibration and rotation of atoms
within molecules can leave spectral fingerprints in radio and infrared waves. If we spread out the radiation at
such longer wavelengths, we can detect emission or absorption lines in the spectra that are characteristic of
specific molecules. Over the years, experiments in our laboratories have shown us the exact wavelengths
associated with changes in the rotation and vibration of many common molecules, giving us a template of
possible lines against which we can now compare our observations of interstellar matter.
The discovery of complex molecules in space came as a surprise because most of interstellar space is filled
with ultraviolet light from stars, and this light is capable of dissociating molecules (breaking them apart into
individual atoms). In retrospect, however, the presence of molecules is not surprising. As we will discuss
further in the next section, and have already seen above, interstellar space also contains significant amounts
of dust capable of blocking out starlight. When this dust accumulates in a single location, the result is a dark
cloud where ultraviolet starlight is blocked and molecules can survive. The largest of these structures are
created where gravity pulls interstellar gas together to form giant molecular clouds, structures as massive as
a million times the mass of the Sun. Within these, most of the interstellar hydrogen has formed the molecule
H2 (molecular hydrogen). Other, more complex molecules are also present in much smaller quantities.
Giant molecular clouds have densities of hundreds to thousands of atoms per cm3, much denser than
interstellar space is on average. As a result, though they account for a very small fraction of the volume of
interstellar space, they contain a significant fraction—20–30%—of the total mass of the Milky Way’s gas.
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
Because of their high density, molecular clouds block ultraviolet starlight, the main agent for heating most
interstellar gas. As a result, they tend to be extremely cold, with typical temperatures near 10 K (−263 °C). Giant
molecular clouds are also the sites where new stars form, as we will discuss below.
It is in these dark regions of space, protected from starlight, that molecules can form. Chemical reactions
occurring both in the gas and on the surface of dust grains lead to much more complex compounds, hundreds
of which have been identified in interstellar space. Among the simplest of these are water (H2O), carbon
monoxide (CO), which is produced by fires on Earth, and ammonia (NH3), whose smell you recognize in strong
home cleaning products. Carbon monoxide is particularly abundant in interstellar space and is the primary
tool that astronomers use to study giant molecular clouds. Unfortunately, the most abundant molecule, H2, is
particularly difficult to observe directly because in most giant molecular clouds, it is too cold to emit even at
radio wavelengths. CO, which tends to be present wherever H2 is found, is a much better emitter and is often
used by astronomers to trace molecular hydrogen.
The more complex molecules astronomers have found are mostly combinations of hydrogen, oxygen, carbon,
nitrogen, and sulfur atoms. Many of these molecules are organic (those that contain carbon and are
associated with the carbon chemistry of life on Earth.) They include formaldehyde (used to preserve living
tissues), alcohol (see the feature box on Cocktails in Space), and antifreeze.
In 1996, astronomers discovered acetic acid (the prime ingredient of vinegar) in a cloud lying in the direction
of the constellation of Sagittarius. To balance the sour with the sweet, a simple sugar (glycolaldehyde) has also
been found. The largest compounds yet discovered in interstellar space are fullerenes, molecules in which 60
or 70 carbon atoms are arranged in a cage-like configuration (see Figure 20.8). See Table 20.1 for a list of a few
of the more interesting interstellar molecules that have been found so far.
Figure 20.8 Fullerene C60. This three-dimensional perspective shows the characteristic cage-like arrangement of the 60 carbon
atoms in a molecule of fullerene C60. Fullerene C60 is also known as a “buckyball,” or as its full name, buckminsterfullerene, because
of its similarity to the multisided architectural domes designed by American inventor R. Buckminster Fuller.
Some Interesting Interstellar Molecules
Name
Chemical Formula
Use on Earth
Ammonia
NH3
Household cleansers
Formaldehyde
H2CO
Embalming fluid
Acetylene
HC2H
Fuel for a welding torch
Table 20.1
20.2 • Interstellar Gas
Some Interesting Interstellar Molecules
Name
Chemical Formula
Use on Earth
Acetic acid
C2H2O4
The essence of vinegar
Ethyl alcohol
CH3CH2OH
End-of-semester parties
Ethylene glycol
HOCH2CH2OH
Antifreeze ingredient
Benzene
C6H6
Carbon ring, ingredient in varnishes and dyes
Table 20.1
The cold interstellar clouds also contain cyanoacetylene (HC3N) and acetaldehyde (CH3CHO), generally
regarded as starting points for amino acid formation. These are building blocks of proteins, which are among
the fundamental chemicals from which living organisms on Earth are constructed. The presence of these
organic molecules does not imply that life exists in space, but it does show that the chemical building blocks of
life can form under a wide range of conditions in the universe. As we learn more about how complex
molecules are produced in interstellar clouds, we gain an increased understanding of the kinds of processes
that preceded the beginnings of life on Earth billions of years ago.
Interested in learning more about fullerenes, buckyballs, or buckminsterfullerenes (as they’re called)?
Watch a brief video from NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (https://openstax.org/l/30NASAjetprop) that
explains what they are and illustrates how they were discovered in space.
Cocktails in Space
Among the molecules astronomers have identified in interstellar clouds is alcohol, which comes in two
varieties: methyl (or wood) alcohol and ethyl alcohol (the kind you find in cocktails). Ethyl alcohol is a pretty
complex molecule, written by chemists as C2H5OH. It is quite plentiful in space (relatively speaking). In
clouds where it has been identified, we detect up to one molecule for every m3. The largest of the clouds
(which can be several hundred light-years across) have enough ethyl alcohol to make 1028 fifths of liquor.
We need not fear, however, that future interstellar astronauts will become interstellar alcoholics. Even if a
spaceship were equipped with a giant funnel 1 kilometer across and could scoop it through such a cloud at
the speed of light, it would take about a thousand years to gather up enough alcohol for one standard
martini.
Furthermore, the very same clouds also contain water (H2O) molecules. Your scoop would gather them up
as well, and there are a lot more of them because they are simpler and thus easier to form. For the fun of it,
one astronomical paper actually calculated the proof of a typical cloud. Proof is the ratio of alcohol to water
in a drink, where 0 proof means all water, 100 proof means half alcohol and half water, and 200 proof
LINK TO LEARNING
MAKING CONNECTIONS
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
means all alcohol. The proof of the interstellar cloud was only 0.2, not enough to qualify as a stiff drink
20.3
Cosmic Dust
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how we can detect interstellar dust
Understand the role and importance of infrared observations in studying dust
Explain the terms extinction and interstellar reddening
Figure 20.9 shows a striking example of what is actually a common sight through large telescopes: a dark
region on the sky that appears to be nearly empty of stars. For a long time, astronomers debated whether
these dark regions were empty “tunnels” through which we looked beyond the stars of the Milky Way Galaxy
into intergalactic space, or clouds of some dark material that blocked the light of the stars beyond. The
astronomer William Herschel (discoverer of the planet Uranus) thought it was the former, once remarking
after seeing one, “Here truly is a hole in heaven!” However, American astronomer E. E. Barnard is generally
credited with showing from his extensive series of nebula photographs that the latter interpretation is the
correct one (see the feature box on Edward Emerson Barnard).
Figure 20.9 Barnard 68. This object, first catalogued by E. E. Barnard, is a dark interstellar cloud. Its striking appearance is due to the
fact that, since it is relatively close to Earth, there are no bright stars between us and it, and its dust obscures the light from the stars
behind it. (It looks a little bit like a sideways heart; one astronomers sent a photo of this object to his sweetheart as a valentine.)
(credit: modification of work by ESO)
Dusty clouds in space betray their presence in several ways: by blocking the light from distant stars, by
emitting energy in the infrared part of the spectrum, by reflecting the light from nearby stars, and by making
distant stars look redder than they really are.
Edward Emerson Barnard
Born in 1857 in Nashville, Tennessee, two months after his father died, Edward Barnard (Figure 20.10) grew
up in such poor circumstances that he had to drop out of school at age nine to help support his ailing
mother. He soon became an assistant to a local photographer, where he learned to love both photography
VOYAGERS IN ASTRONOMY
20.3 • Cosmic Dust
and astronomy, destined to become the dual passions of his life. He worked as a photographer’s aide for 17
years, studying astronomy on his own. In 1883, he obtained a job as an assistant at the Vanderbilt
University Observatory, which enabled him at last to take some astronomy courses.
Married in 1881, Barnard built a house for his family that he could ill afford. But as it happened, a patent
medicine manufacturer offered a $200 prize (a lot of money in those days) for the discovery of any new
comet. With the determination that became characteristic of him, Barnard spent every clear night searching
for comets. He discovered seven of them between 1881 and 1887, earning enough money to make the
payments on his home; this “Comet House” later became a local attraction. (By the end of his life, Barnard
had found 17 comets through diligent observation.)
In 1887, Barnard got a position at the newly founded Lick Observatory, where he soon locked horns with
the director, Edward Holden, a blustering administrator who made Barnard’s life miserable. (To be fair,
Barnard soon tried to do the same for him.) Despite being denied the telescope time that he needed for his
photographic work, in 1892, Barnard managed to discover the first new moon found around Jupiter since
Galileo’s day, a stunning observational feat that earned him world renown. Now in a position to demand
more telescope time, he perfected his photographic techniques and soon began to publish the best images
of the Milky Way taken up to that time. It was during the course of this work that he began to examine the
dark regions among the crowded star lanes of the Galaxy and to realize that they must be vast clouds of
obscuring material (rather than “holes” in the distribution of stars).
Astronomer-historian Donald Osterbrock has called Barnard an “observaholic:” his daily mood seemed to
depend entirely on how clear the sky promised to be for his night of observing. He was a driven, neurotic
man, concerned about his lack of formal training, fearful of being scorned, and afraid that he might
somehow slip back into the poverty of his younger days. He had difficulty taking vacations and lived for his
work: only serious illness could deter him from making astronomical observations.
In 1895, Barnard, having had enough of the political battles at Lick, accepted a job at the Yerkes
Observatory near Chicago, where he remained until his death in 1923. He continued his photographic work,
publishing compilations of his images that became classic photographic atlases, and investigating the
varieties of nebulae revealed in his photographs. He also made measurements of the sizes and features of
planets, participated in observations of solar eclipses, and carefully cataloged dark nebulae (see Figure
20.9). In 1916, he discovered the star with the largest proper motion, the second-closest star system to our
own (see Analyzing Starlight). It is now called Barnard’s Star in his honor.
Figure 20.10 Edward Emerson Barnard (1857–1923). Barnard’s observations provided information that furthered many
astronomical explorations. (credit: The Lick Observatory)
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
Detecting Dust
The dark cloud seen in Figure 20.9 blocks the light of the many stars that lie behind it; note how the regions in
other parts of the photograph are crowded with stars. Barnard 68 is an example of a relatively dense cloud or
dark nebula containing tiny, solid dust grains. Such opaque clouds are conspicuous on any photograph of the
Milky Way, the galaxy in which the Sun is located (see the figures in The Milky Way Galaxy). The “dark rift,”
which runs lengthwise down a long part of the Milky Way in our sky and appears to split it in two, is produced
by a collection of such obscuring clouds.
While dust clouds are too cold to radiate a measurable amount of energy in the visible part of the spectrum,
they glow brightly in the infrared (Figure 20.11). The reason is that small dust grains absorb visible light and
ultraviolet radiation very efficiently. The grains are heated by the absorbed radiation, typically to temperatures
from 10 to about 500 K, and re-radiate this heat at infrared wavelengths.
Figure 20.11 Visible and Infrared Images of the Horsehead Nebula in Orion. This dark cloud is one of the best-known images in
astronomy, probably because it really does resemble a horse’s head. The horse-head shape is an extension of a large cloud of dust
that fills the lower part of the picture. (a) Seen in visible light, the dust clouds are especially easy to see against the bright
background. (b) This infrared radiation image from the region of the horse head was recorded by NASA’s Wide-Field Infrared Survey
Explorer. Note how the regions that appear dark in visible light appear bright in the infrared. The dust is heated by nearby stars and
re-radiates this heat in the infrared. Only the top of the horse’s head is visible in the infrared image. Bright dots seen in the nebula
below and to the left and at the top of the horse head are young, newly formed stars. The insets show the horse head and the bright
nebula in more detail. (credit a: modification of work by ESO and Digitized Sky Survey; credit b: modification of work by NASA/JPL-
Caltech)
Thanks to their small sizes and low temperatures, interstellar grains radiate most of their energy at infrared to
microwave frequencies, with wavelengths of tens to hundreds of microns. Earth’s atmosphere is opaque to
radiation at these wavelengths, so emission by interstellar dust is best measured from space. Observations
from above Earth’s atmosphere show that dust clouds are present throughout the plane of the Milky Way
(Figure 20.12).
20.3 • Cosmic Dust
Figure 20.12 Infrared Emission from the Plane of the Milky Way. This infrared image taken by the Spitzer Space Telescope shows
a field in the plane of the Milky Way Galaxy. (Our Galaxy is in the shape of a frisbee; the plane of the Milky Way is the flat disk of that
frisbee. Since the Sun, Earth, and solar system are located in the plane of the Milky Way and at a large distance from its center, we
view the Galaxy edge on, much as we might look at a glass plate from its edge.) This emission is produced by tiny dust grains, which
emit at 3.6 microns (blue in this image), 8.0 microns (green), and 24 microns (red). The densest regions of dust are so cold and
opaque that they appear as dark clouds even at these infrared wavelengths. The red bubbles visible throughout indicate regions
where the dust has been warmed up by young stars. This heating increases the emission at 24 microns, leading to the redder color
in this image. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech/University of Wisconsin)
Some dense clouds of dust are close to luminous stars and scatter enough starlight to become visible. Such a
cloud of dust, illuminated by starlight, is called a reflection nebula, since the light we see is starlight reflected
off the grains of dust. One of the best-known examples is the nebulosity around each of the brightest stars in
the Pleiades cluster (see Figure 20.1). The dust grains are small, and such small particles turn out to scatter
light with blue wavelengths more efficiently than light at red wavelengths. A reflection nebula, therefore,
usually appears bluer than its illuminating star (Figure 20.13).
Figure 20.13 Pleiades Star Cluster. The bluish light surrounding the stars in this image is an example of a reflection nebula. Like fog
around a street lamp, a reflection nebula shines only because the dust within it scatters light from a nearby bright source. The
Pleiades cluster is currently passing through an interstellar cloud that contains dust grains, which scatter the light from the hot blue
stars in the cluster. The Pleiades cluster is about 400 light-years from the Sun. (credit: NASA, ESA and AURA/Caltech)
Gas and dust are generally intermixed in space, although the proportions are not exactly the same
everywhere. The presence of dust is apparent in many photographs of emission nebulae in the constellation of
Sagittarius, where we see an H II region surrounded by a blue reflection nebula. Which type of nebula appears
brighter depends on the kinds of stars that cause the gas and dust to glow. Stars cooler than about 25,000 K
have so little ultraviolet radiation of wavelengths shorter than 91.2 nanometers—which is the wavelength
required to ionize hydrogen—that the reflection nebulae around such stars outshine the emission nebulae.
Stars hotter than 25,000 K emit enough ultraviolet energy that the emission nebulae produced around them
generally outshine the reflection nebulae.
Interstellar Reddening
The tiny interstellar dust grains absorb some of the starlight they intercept. But at least half of the starlight
that interacts with a grain is merely scattered, that is, it is redirected rather than absorbed. Since neither the
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
absorbed nor the scattered starlight reaches us directly, both absorption and scattering make stars look
dimmer. The effects of both processes are called interstellar extinction (Figure 20.14).
Astronomers first came to understand interstellar extinction around the early 1930s, as the explanation of a
puzzling observation. In the early part of the twentieth century, astronomers discovered that some stars look
red even though their spectral lines indicate that they must be extremely hot (and thus should look blue). The
solution to this seeming contradiction turned out to be that the light from these hot stars is not only dimmed
but also reddened by interstellar dust, a phenomenon known as interstellar reddening.
Figure 20.14 Barnard 68 in Infrared. In this image, we see Barnard 68, the same object shown in Figure 20.9. The difference is that,
in the previous image, the blue, green, and red channels showed light in the visible (or very nearly visible) part of the spectrum. In
this image, the red color shows radiation emitted in the infrared at a wavelength of 2.2 microns. Interstellar extinction is much
smaller at infrared than at visible wavelengths, so the stars behind the cloud become visible in the infrared channel. (credit: ESO)
Dust does not interact with all the colors of light the same way. Much of the violet, blue, and green light from
these stars has been scattered or absorbed by dust, so it does not reach Earth. Some of their orange and red
light, with longer wavelengths, on the other hand, more easily penetrates the intervening dust and completes
its long journey through space to enter Earth-based telescopes (Figure 20.15). Thus, the star looks redder from
Earth than it would if you could see it from nearby. (Strictly speaking, reddening is not the most accurate term
for this process, since no red color is added; instead, blues and related colors are subtracted, so it should more
properly be called “deblueing.”) In the most extreme cases, stars can be so reddened that they are entirely
undetectable at visible wavelengths and can be seen only at infrared or longer wavelengths (Figure 20.14).
20.3 • Cosmic Dust
Figure 20.15 Scattering of Light by Dust. Interstellar dust scatters blue light more efficiently than red light, thereby making distant
stars appear redder and giving clouds of dust near stars a bluish hue. Here, a red ray of light from a star comes straight through to
the observer, whereas a blue ray is shown scattering. A similar scattering process makes Earth’s sky look blue.
We have all seen an example of reddening on Earth. The Sun appears much redder at sunset than it does at
noon. The lower the Sun is in the sky, the longer the path its light must travel through the atmosphere. Over
this greater distance, there is a greater chance that sunlight will be scattered. Since red light is less likely to be
scattered than blue light, the Sun appears more and more red as it approaches the horizon.
By the way, scattering of sunlight is also what causes our sky to look blue, even though the gases that make up
Earth’s atmosphere are transparent. As sunlight comes in, it scatters from the molecules of air. The small size
of the molecules means that the blue colors scatter much more efficiently than the greens, yellows, and reds.
Thus, the blue in sunlight is scattered out of the beam and all over the sky. The light from the Sun that comes
to your eye, on the other hand, is missing some of its blue, so the Sun looks a bit yellower, even when it is high
in the sky, than it would from space.
The fact that starlight is reddened by interstellar dust means that long-wavelength radiation is transmitted
through the Galaxy more efficiently than short-wavelength radiation. Consequently, if we wish to see farther in
a direction with considerable interstellar material, we should look at long wavelengths. This simple fact
provides one of the motivations for the development of infrared astronomy. In the infrared region at 2
microns (2000 nanometers), for example, the obscuration is only one-sixth as great as in the visible region (500
nanometers), and we can therefore study stars that are more than twice as distant before their light is blocked
by interstellar dust. This ability to see farther by observing in the infrared portion of the spectrum represents a
major gain for astronomers trying to understand the structure of our Galaxy or probing its puzzling, but
distant, center (see The Milky Way Galaxy).
Interstellar Grains
Before we get to the details about interstellar dust, we should perhaps get one concern out of the way. Why
couldn’t it be the interstellar gas that reddens distant stars and not the dust? We already know from everyday
experience that atomic or molecular gas is almost transparent. Consider Earth’s atmosphere. Despite its very
high density compared with that of interstellar gas, it is so transparent as to be practically invisible. (Gas does
have a few specific spectral lines, but they absorb only a tiny fraction of the light as it passes through.)The
quantity of gas required to produce the observed absorption of light in interstellar space would have to be
enormous. The gravitational attraction of so great a mass of gas would affect the motions of stars in ways that
could easily be detected. Such motions are not observed, and thus, the interstellar absorption cannot be the
result of gases.
Although gas does not absorb much light, we know from everyday experience that tiny solid or liquid particles
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
can be very efficient absorbers. Water vapor in the air is quite invisible. When some of that vapor condenses
into tiny water droplets, however, the resulting cloud is opaque. Dust storms, smoke, and smog offer familiar
examples of the efficiency with which solid particles absorb light. On the basis of arguments like these,
astronomers have concluded that widely scattered solid particles in interstellar space must be responsible for
the observed dimming of starlight. What are these particles made of? And how did they form?
Observations like the pictures in this chapter show that a great deal of this dust exists; hence, it must be
primarily composed of elements that are abundant in the universe (and in interstellar matter). After hydrogen
and helium, the most abundant elements are oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen. These three elements, along with
magnesium, silicon, iron—and perhaps hydrogen itself—turn out to be the most important components of
interstellar dust.
Many of the dust particles can be characterized as sootlike (rich in carbon) or sandlike (containing silicon and
oxygen). Grains of interstellar dust are found in meteorites and can be identified because the abundances of
certain isotopes are different from what we see in other solar system material. Several different interstellar
dust substances have been identified in this way in the laboratory, including graphite and diamonds. (Don’t
get excited; these diamonds are only a billionth of a meter in size and would hardly make an impressive
engagement ring!)
The most widely accepted model pictures the grains with rocky cores that are either like soot (rich in carbon)
or like sand (rich in silicates). In the dark clouds where molecules can form, these cores are covered by icy
mantles (Figure 20.16). The most common ices in the grains are water (H2O), methane (CH4), and ammonia
(NH3)—all built out of atoms that are especially abundant in the realm of the stars. The ice mantles, in turn, are
sites for some of the chemical reactions that produce complex organic molecules.
Figure 20.16 Model of an Interstellar Dust Grain. A typical interstellar grain is thought to consist of a core of rocky material
(silicates) or graphite, surrounded by a mantle of ices. Typical grain sizes are 10–8 to 10–7 meters. (This is from 1/100 to 1/10 of a
micron; by contrast, human hair is about 10–200 microns wide.)
Typical individual grains must be just slightly smaller than the wavelength of visible light. If the grains were a
lot smaller, they would not block the light efficiently, as Figure 20.13 and other images in this chapter show
that it does.
On the other hand, if the dust grains were much larger than the wavelength of light, then starlight would not
be reddened. Things that are much larger than the wavelength of light would block both blue and red light
with equal efficiency. In this way we can deduce that a characteristic interstellar dust grain contains 106 to 109
20.3 • Cosmic Dust
atoms and has a diameter of 10–8 to 10–7 meters (10 to 100 nanometers). This is actually more like the specks
of solid matter in cigarette smoke than the larger grains of dust you might find under your desk when you are
too busy studying astronomy to clean properly.
20.4
Cosmic Rays
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define cosmic rays and describe their composition
Explain why it is hard to study the origin of cosmic rays, and the current leading hypotheses about where
they might come from
In addition to gas and dust, a third class of particles, noteworthy for the high speeds with which they travel, is
found in interstellar space. Cosmic rays were discovered in 1911 by an Austrian physicist, Victor Hess, who
flew simple instruments aboard balloons and showed that high-speed particles arrive at Earth from space
(Figure 20.17). The term “cosmic ray” is misleading, implying it might be like a ray of light, but we are stuck
with the name. They are definitely particles and have nearly the same composition as ordinary interstellar gas.
Their behavior, however, is radically different from the gas we have discussed so far.
Figure 20.17 Victor Hess (1883–1964). Cosmic-ray pioneer Victor Hess returns from a 1912 balloon flight that reached an altitude of
5.3 kilometers. It was on such balloon flights that Hess discovered cosmic rays.
The Nature of Cosmic Rays
Cosmic rays are mostly high-speed atomic nuclei and electrons. Speeds equal to 90% of the speed of light are
typical. Almost 90% of the cosmic rays are hydrogen nuclei (protons) stripped of their accompanying electron.
Helium and heavier nuclei constitute about 9% more. About 1% of cosmic rays have masses equal to the mass
of the electron, and 10–20% of these carry positive charge rather than the negative charge that characterizes
electrons. A positively charged particle with the mass of an electron is called a positron and is a form of
antimatter (we discussed antimatter in The Sun: A Nuclear Powerhouse).
The abundances of various atomic nuclei in cosmic rays mirror the abundances in stars and interstellar gas,
with one important exception. The light elements lithium, beryllium, and boron are far more abundant in
cosmic rays than in the Sun and stars. These light elements are formed when high-speed, cosmic-ray nuclei of
carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen collide with protons in interstellar space and break apart. (By the way, if you, like
most readers, have not memorized all the elements and want to see how any of those we mention fit into the
sequence of elements, you will find them all listed in Appendix K in order of the number of protons they
contain.)
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
Cosmic rays reach Earth in substantial numbers, and we can determine their properties either by capturing
them directly or by observing the reactions that occur when they collide with atoms in our atmosphere. The
total energy deposited by cosmic rays in Earth’s atmosphere is only about one-billionth the energy received
from the Sun, but it is comparable to the energy received in the form of starlight. Some of the cosmic rays
come to Earth from the surface of the Sun, but most come from outside the solar system.
Where Do They Come From?
There is a serious problem in identifying the source of cosmic rays. Since light travels in straight lines, we can
tell where it comes from simply by looking. Cosmic rays are charged particles, and their direction of motion
can be changed by magnetic fields. The paths of cosmic rays are curved both by magnetic fields in interstellar
space and by Earth’s own field. Calculations show that low-energy cosmic rays may spiral many times around
Earth before entering the atmosphere where we can detect them. If an airplane circles an airport many times
before landing, it is difficult for an observer to determine the direction from which it originated. So, too, after a
cosmic ray circles Earth several times, it is impossible to know where its journey began.
There are a few clues, however, about where cosmic rays might be generated. We know, for example, that
magnetic fields in interstellar space are strong enough to keep all but the most energetic cosmic rays from
escaping the Galaxy. It therefore seems likely that they are produced somewhere inside the Galaxy. The only
likely exceptions are those with the very highest energy. Such cosmic rays move so rapidly that they are not
significantly influenced by interstellar magnetic fields, and thus, they could escape our Galaxy. By analogy,
they could escape other galaxies as well, so some of the highest-energy cosmic rays that we detect may have
been created in some distant galaxy. Still, most cosmic rays must have their source inside the Milky Way
Galaxy.
We can also estimate how far typical cosmic rays travel before striking Earth. The light elements lithium,
beryllium, and boron hold the key. Since these elements are formed when carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen strike
interstellar protons, we can calculate how long, on average, cosmic rays must travel through space in order to
experience enough collisions to account for the amount of lithium and the other light elements that they
contain. It turns out that the required distance is about 30 times around the Galaxy. At speeds near the speed
of light, it takes perhaps 3–10 million years for the average cosmic ray to travel this distance. This is only a
small fraction of the age of the Galaxy or the universe, so cosmic rays must have been created fairly recently
on a cosmic timescale.
The best candidates for a source of cosmic rays are the supernova explosions, which mark the violent deaths
of some stars (and which we will discuss in The Death of Stars). The material ejected by the explosion produces
a shock wave, which travels through the interstellar medium. Charged particles can become trapped, bouncing
back and forth across the front of the shock wave many times. With each pass through the shock, the
magnetic fields inside it accelerate the particles more and more. Eventually, they are traveling at close to the
speed of light and can escape from the shock to become cosmic rays. Some collapsed stars (including star
remnants left over from supernova explosions) may, under the right circumstances, also serve as accelerators
of particles. In any case, we again find that the raw material of the Galaxy is enriched by the life cycle of stars.
In the next section, we will look at this enrichment process in more detail.
You can watch a brief video about the Calorimetric Electron Telescope (CALET) (https://openstax.org/l/
30CALETvid) mission, a cosmic ray detector at the International Space Station. The link takes you to NASA
Johnson’s “Space Station Live: Cosmic Ray Detector for ISS.”
LINK TO LEARNING
20.4 • Cosmic Rays
20.5
The Life Cycle of Cosmic Material
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how interstellar matter flows into and out of our Galaxy and transforms from one phase to
another, and understand how star formation and evolution affects the properties of the interstellar medium
Explain how the heavy elements and dust grains found in interstellar space got there and describe how
dust grains help produce molecules that eventually find their way into planetary systems
Flows of Interstellar Gas
The most important thing to understand about the interstellar medium is that it is not static. Interstellar gas
orbits through the Galaxy, and as it does so, it can become more or less dense, hotter and colder, and change
its state of ionization. A particular parcel of gas may be neutral hydrogen at some point, then find itself near a
young, hot star and become part of an H II region. The star may then explode as a supernova, heating the
nearby gas up to temperatures of millions of degrees. Over millions of years, the gas may cool back down and
become neutral again, before it collects into a dense region that gravity gathers into a giant molecular cloud
(Figure 20.18)
Figure 20.18 Large-Scale Distribution of Interstellar Matter. This image is from a computer simulation of the Milky Way Galaxy’s
interstellar medium as a whole. The majority of gas, visible in greenish colors, is neutral hydrogen. In the densest regions in the
spiral arms, shown in yellow, the gas is collected into giant molecular clouds. Low-density holes in the spiral arms, shown in blue, are
the result of supernova explosions. (credit: modification of work by Mark Krumholz)
At any given time in the Milky Way, the majority of the interstellar gas by mass and volume is in the form of
atomic hydrogen. The much-denser molecular clouds occupy a tiny fraction of the volume of interstellar space
but add roughly 30% to the total mass of gas between the stars. Conversely, the hot gas produced by
supernova explosions contributes a negligible mass but occupies a significant fraction of the volume of
interstellar space. H II regions, though they are visually spectacular, constitute only a very small fraction of
either the mass or volume of interstellar material.
However, the interstellar medium is not a closed system. Gas from intergalactic space constantly falls onto the
Milky Way due to its gravity, adding new gas to the interstellar medium. Conversely, in giant molecular clouds
where gas collects together due to gravity, the gas can collapse to form new stars, as discussed in The Birth of
Stars and the Discovery of Planets outside the Solar System. This process locks interstellar matter into stars. As
the stars age, evolve, and eventually die, massive stars lose a large fraction of their mass, and low-mass stars
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
lose very little. On average, roughly one-third of the matter incorporated into stars goes back into interstellar
space. Supernova explosions have so much energy that they can drive interstellar mass out of the Galaxy and
back into intergalactic space. Thus, the total amount of mass of the interstellar medium is set by a competition
between the gain of mass from intergalactic space, the conversion of interstellar mass into stars, and the loss
of interstellar mass back into intergalactic space due to supernovae. This entire process is known as the
baryon cycle—baryon is from the Greek word for “heavy,” and the cycle has this name because it is the
repeating process that the heavier components of the universe—the atoms—undergo.
The Cycle of Dust and Heavy Elements
While much of the mass of the interstellar medium is material accreted during the last few billion years from
intergalactic space, this is not true of the elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, or of the dust. Instead,
these components of the interstellar medium were made inside stars in the Milky Way, which returned them to
the interstellar medium at the end of their lives. We will talk more about this process in later chapters, but for
now just bear in mind what we learned in The Sun: A Nuclear Powerhouse. What stars “do for a living” is fuse
heavier elements from lighter ones, producing energy in the process. As stars mature, they begin to lose some
of the newly made elements to the reservoir of interstellar matter.
The same is true of dust grains. Dust forms when grains can condense in regions where gas is dense and cool.
One place where the right conditions are found is the winds from luminous cool stars (the red giants and
supergiants we discussed in The Stars: A Celestial Census). Grains can also condense in the matter thrown off
by a supernova explosion as the ejected gases begin to cool.
The dust grains produced by stars may grow even further when they spend time in the dense parts of the
interstellar medium, inside molecular clouds. In these environments, grains can stick together or gather
additional atoms from the gas around them, growing larger. They also facilitate the production of other
compounds, including some of the more complex molecules we discussed earlier.
The surfaces of the dust grains (see Cosmic Dust)—which would seem very large if you were an atom—provide
“nooks and crannies” where these atoms can stick long enough to find partners and form molecules. (Think of
the dust grains as “interstellar social clubs” where lonely atoms can meet and form meaningful relationships.)
Eventually, the dust grains become coated with ices. The presence of the dust shields the molecules inside the
clouds from ultraviolet radiation and cosmic rays that would break them up.
When stars finally begin to form within the cloud, they heat the grains and evaporate the ices. The
gravitational attraction of the newly forming stars also increases the density of the surrounding cloud
material. Many more chemical reactions take place on the surfaces of grains in the gas surrounding the newly
forming stars, and these areas are where organic molecules are formed. These molecules can be incorporated
into newly formed planetary systems, and the early Earth may have been seeded in just such a way.
Indeed, scientists speculate that some of the water on Earth may have come from interstellar grains. Recent
observations from space have shown that water is abundant in dense interstellar clouds. Since stars are
formed from this material, water must be present when solar systems, including our own, come into existence.
The water in our oceans and lakes may have come initially from water locked into the rocky material that
accreted to form Earth. Alternatively, the water may have been brought to Earth when asteroids and comets
(formed from the same cloud that made the planets) later impacted it. Scientists estimate that one comet
impact every thousand years during Earth’s first billion years would have been enough to account for the
water we see today. Of course, both sources may have contributed to the water we now enjoy drinking and
swimming in.
Any interstellar grains that are incorporated into newly forming stars (instead of the colder planets and
smaller bodies around them) will be destroyed by their high temperatures. But eventually, each new
generation of stars will evolve to become red giants, with stellar winds of their own. Some of these stars will
also become supernovae and explode. Thus, the process of recycling cosmic material can start all over again.
20.5 • The Life Cycle of Cosmic Material
20.6
Interstellar Matter around the Sun
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how interstellar matter is arranged around our solar system
Explain why scientists think that the Sun is located in a hot bubble
We want to conclude our discussion of interstellar matter by asking how this material is organized in our
immediate neighborhood. As we discussed above, orbiting X-ray observatories have shown that the Galaxy is
full of bubbles of hot, X-ray-emitting gas. They also revealed a diffuse background of X-rays that appears to fill
the entire sky from our perspective (Figure 20.19). While some of this emission comes from the interaction of
the solar wind with the interstellar medium, a majority of it comes from beyond the solar system. The natural
explanation for why there is X-ray-emitting gas all around us is that the Sun is itself inside one of the bubbles.
We therefore call our “neighborhood” the Local Hot Bubble, or Local Bubble for short. The Local Bubble is
much less dense—an average of approximately 0.01 atoms per cm3—than the average interstellar density of
about 1 atom per cm3. This local gas has a temperature of about a million degrees, just like the gas in the
other superbubbles that spread throughout our Galaxy, but because there is so little hot material, this high
temperature does not affect the stars or planets in the area in any way.
What caused the Local Bubble to form? Scientists are not entirely sure, but the leading candidate is winds from
stars and supernova explosions. In a nearby region in the direction of the constellations Scorpius and
Centaurus, a lot of star formation took place about 15 million years ago. The most massive of these stars
evolved very quickly until they produced strong winds, and some ended their lives by exploding. These
processes filled the region around the Sun with hot gas, driving away cooler, denser gas. The rim of this
expanding superbubble reached the Sun about 7.6 million years ago and now lies more than 200 light-years
past the Sun in the general direction of the constellations of Orion, Perseus, and Auriga.
Figure 20.19 Sky in X-Rays. This image, made by the ROSAT satellite, shows the whole sky in X-rays as seen from Earth. Different
colors indicate different X-ray energies: red is 0.25 kiloelectron volts, green is 0.75 kiloelectron volts, and blue is 1.5 kiloelectron volts.
The image is oriented so the plane of the Galaxy runs across the middle of the image. The ubiquitous red color, which does not
disappear completely even in the galactic plane, is evidence for a source of X-rays all around the Sun. (credit: modification of work by
NASA)
A few clouds of interstellar matter do exist within the Local Bubble. The Sun itself seems to have entered a
cloud about 10,000 years ago. This cloud is warm (with a temperature of about 7000 K) and has a density of 0.3
hydrogen atom per cm3—higher than most of the Local Bubble but still so tenuous that it is also referred to as
Local Fluff (Figure 20.20). (Aren’t these astronomical names fun sometimes?)
While this is a pretty thin cloud, we estimate that it contributes 50 to 100 times more particles than the solar
wind to the diffuse material between the planets in our solar system. These interstellar particles have been
20 • Between the Stars: Gas and Dust in Space
detected and their numbers counted by the spacecraft traveling between the planets. Perhaps someday,
scientists will devise a way to collect them without destroying them and to return them to Earth, so that we can
touch—or at least study in our laboratories—these messengers from distant stars.
Figure 20.20 Local Fluff. The Sun and planets are currently moving through the Local Interstellar Cloud, which is also called the
Local Fluff. Fluff is an appropriate description because the density of this cloud is only about 0.3 atom per cm3. In comparison,
Earth’s atmosphere at the edge of space has around 1.2 × 1013 molecules per cm3. This image shows the patches of interstellar
matter (mostly hydrogen gas) within about 20 light-years of the Sun. The temperature of the Local Interstellar Cloud is about 7000 K.
The arrows point toward the directions that different parts of the cloud are moving. The names associated with each arrow indicate
the constellations located on the sky toward which the parts of the cloud are headed. The solar system is thought to have entered
the Local Interstellar Cloud, which is a small cloud located within a much larger superbubble that is expanding outward from the
Scorpius-Centaurus region of the sky, at some point between 44,000 and 150,000 years ago and is expected to remain within it for
another 10,000 to 20,000 years. (credit: modification of work by NASA/Goddard/Adler/University Chicago/Wesleyan)
20.6 • Interstellar Matter around the Sun
Key Terms
baryon cycle
the cycling of mass in and out of the interstellar medium, including accretion of gas from
intergalactic space, loss of gas back into intergalactic space, and conversion of interstellar gas into stars
cosmic rays
atomic nuclei (mostly protons) and electrons that are observed to strike Earth’s atmosphere
with exceedingly high energies.
H II region
the region of ionized hydrogen in interstellar space
interstellar dust
tiny solid grains in interstellar space thought to consist of a core of rocklike material
(silicates) or graphite surrounded by a mantle of ices; water, methane, and ammonia are probably the most
abundant ices
interstellar extinction
the attenuation or absorption of light by dust in the interstellar medium
interstellar medium (ISM)
(or interstellar matter) the gas and dust between the stars in a galaxy
Local Bubble
(or Local Hot Bubble) a region of low-density, million degree gas in which the Sun and solar
system are currently located
Local Fluff
a slightly denser cloud inside the Local Bubble, inside which the Sun also lies
molecular cloud
a large, dense, cold interstellar cloud; because of its size and density, this type of cloud can
keep ultraviolet radiation from reaching its interior, where molecules are able to form
nebula
a cloud of interstellar gas or dust; the term is most often used for clouds that are seen to glow with
visible light or infrared
reddening (interstellar)
the reddening of starlight passing through interstellar dust because dust scatters
blue light more effectively than red
Summary
20.1 The Interstellar Medium
About 15% of the visible matter in the Galaxy is in the form of gas and dust, serving as the raw material for
new stars. About 99% of this interstellar matter is in the form of gas—individual atoms or molecules. The most
abundant elements in the interstellar gas are hydrogen and helium. About 1% of the interstellar matter is in
the form of solid interstellar dust grains.
20.2 Interstellar Gas
Interstellar gas may be hot or cold. Gas found near hot stars emits light by fluorescence, that is, light is
emitted when an electron is captured by an ion and cascades down to lower-energy levels. Glowing clouds
(nebulae) of ionized hydrogen are called H II regions and have temperatures of about 10,000 K. Most
hydrogen in interstellar space is not ionized and can best be studied by radio measurements of the
21-centimeter line. Some of the gas in interstellar space is at a temperature of a million degrees, even though
it is far away in hot stars; this ultra-hot gas is probably heated when rapidly moving gas ejected in supernova
explosions sweeps through space. In some places, gravity gathers interstellar gas into giant clouds, within
which the gas is protected from starlight and can form molecules; more than 200 different molecules have
been found in space, including the basic building blocks of proteins, which are fundamental to life as we know
it here on Earth.
20.3 Cosmic Dust
Interstellar dust can be detected: (1) when it blocks the light of stars behind it, (2) when it scatters the light
from nearby stars, and (3) because it makes distant stars look both redder and fainter. These effects are called
interstellar extinction and reddening. Dust can also be detected in the infrared because it emits heat radiation.
Dust is found throughout the plane of the Milky Way. The dust particles are about the same size as the
wavelength of light and consist of rocky cores that are either sootlike (carbon-rich) or sandlike (silicates) with
mantles made of ices such as water, ammonia, and methane.
20 • Key Terms
20.4 Cosmic Rays
Cosmic rays are particles that travel through interstellar space at a typical speed of 90% of the speed of light.
The most abundant elements in cosmic rays are the nuclei of hydrogen and helium, but electrons and
positrons are also found. It is likely that many cosmic rays are produced in supernova shocks.
20.5 The Life Cycle of Cosmic Material
Interstellar matter is constantly flowing through the Galaxy and changing from one phase to another. At the
same time, gas is constantly being added to the Galaxy by accretion from extragalactic space, while mass is
removed from the interstellar medium by being locked in stars. Some of the mass in stars is, in turn, returned
to the interstellar medium when those stars evolve and die. In particular, the heavy elements in interstellar
space were all produced inside stars, while the dust grains are made in the outer regions of stars that have
swelled to be giants. These elements and grains, in turn, can then be incorporated into new stars and
planetary systems that form out of the interstellar medium.
20.6 Interstellar Matter around the Sun
The Sun is located at the edge of a low-density cloud called the Local Fluff. The Sun and this cloud are located
within the Local Bubble, a region extending to at least 300 light-years from the Sun, within which the density of
interstellar material is extremely low. Astronomers think this bubble was blown by some nearby stars that
experienced a strong wind and some supernova explosions.
For Further Exploration
Articles
Goodman, A. “Recycling the Universe.” Sky & Telescope November (2000): 44. Review of how stellar evolution,
the interstellar medium, and supernovae all work together to recycle cosmic material.
Greenberg, J. “The Secrets of Stardust.” Scientific American December (2000): 70. The makeup and
evolutionary role of solid particles between the stars.
Knapp, G. “The Stuff between the Stars.” Sky & Telescope May (1995): 20. An introduction to the interstellar
medium.
Nadis, S. “Searching for the Molecules of Life in Space.” Sky & Telescope January (2002): 32. Recent
observations of water in the interstellar medium by satellite telescopes.
Olinto, A. “Solving the Mystery of Cosmic Rays.” Astronomy April (2014): 30. What accelerates them to such
high energies.
Reynolds, R. “The Gas between the Stars.” Scientific American January (2002): 34. On the interstellar medium.
Websites and Apps
Barnard, E. E., Biographical Memoir: http://www.nasonline.org/publications/biographical-memoirs/memoirpdfs/barnard-edward.pdf (http://www.nasonline.org/publications/biographical-memoirs/memoir-pdfs/
barnard-edward.pdf).
Cosmicopia: https://cosmicopia.gsfc.nasa.gov/ (https://cosmicopia.gsfc.nasa.gov/). NASA’s learning site
explains about the history and modern understanding of cosmic rays.
DECO: https://wipac.wisc.edu/deco (https://wipac.wisc.edu/deco). A smart-phone app for turning your phone
into a cosmic-ray detector.
Hubble Space Telescope Images of Nebulae: https://esahubble.org/images/archive/category/nebulae
(https://esahubble.org/images/archive/category/nebulae). Click on any of the beautiful images in this
collection, and you are taken to a page with more information; while looking at these images, you may also
20 • For Further Exploration
want to browse through the slide sequence on the meaning of colors in the Hubble pictures
(https://hubblesite.org/contents/articles/the-meaning-of-light-and-color (https://hubblesite.org/contents/
articles/the-meaning-of-light-and-color)).
Interstellar Medium Online Tutorial: http://www-ssg.sr.unh.edu/ism/ (http://www-ssg.sr.unh.edu/ism/).
Nontechnical introduction to the interstellar medium (ISM) and how we study it; by the University of New
Hampshire astronomy department.
Messier Catalog of Nebulae, Clusters, and Galaxies: http://astropixels.com/messier/messiercat.html
(http://astropixels.com/messier/messiercat.html). Astronomer Fred Espenak provides the full catalog, with
information and images. (The Wikipedia list does something similar: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
List_of_Messier_objects (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Messier_objects).
Nebulae: What Are They?: http://www.universetoday.com/61103/what-is-a-nebula/
(http://www.universetoday.com/61103/what-is-a-nebula/). Concise introduction by Matt Williams.
Videos
Barnard 68: The Hole in the Sky: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Faz5rgdQSo4
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Faz5rgdQSo4). About this dark cloud and dark clouds in interstellar space
in general (02:08).
Horsehead Nebula in New Light: http://www.esa.int/spaceinvideos/Videos/2013/04/
The_Horsehead_Nebula_in_new_light (http://www.esa.int/spaceinvideos/Videos/2013/04/
The_Horsehead_Nebula_in_new_light). Tour of the dark nebula in different wavelengths; no audio narration,
just music, but explanatory material appears on the screen (03:03).
Hubblecast 65: A Whole New View of the Horsehead Nebula: http://www.spacetelescope.org/videos/
heic1307a/ (http://www.spacetelescope.org/videos/heic1307a/). Report on nebulae in general and about the
Horsehead specifically, with ESO astronomer Joe Liske (06:03).
Interstellar Reddening: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H2M80RAQB6k (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=H2M80RAQB6k). Video demonstrating how reddening works, with Scott Miller of Penn State; a bit
nerdy but useful (03:45).
Hubble Field Guide to the Nebulae: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PYRDiR7peLw
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PYRDiR7peLw). Video briefly explaining the difference between types of
nebulae (04:24).
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
The Sun is located in a region where the density of interstellar matter is low. Suppose that instead it were
located in a dense cloud 20 light-years in diameter that dimmed the visible light from stars lying outside it
by a factor of 100. Have your group discuss how this would have affected the development of civilization
on Earth. For example, would it have presented a problem for early navigators?
B.
Your group members should look through the pictures in this chapter. How big are the nebulae you see in
the images? Are there any clues either in the images or in the captions? Are the clouds they are part of
significantly bigger than the nebulae we can see? Why? Suggest some ways that we can determine the
sizes of nebulae.
C.
How do the members of your group think astronomers are able to estimate the distances of such nebulae
in our own Galaxy? (Hint: Look at the images. Can you see anything between us and the nebula in some
cases. Review Celestial Distances, if you need to remind yourself about methods of measuring distances.)
D.
The text suggests that a tube of air extending from the surface of Earth to the top of the atmosphere
20 • Collaborative Group Activities
contains more atoms than a tube of the same diameter extending from the top of the atmosphere to the
edge of the observable universe. Scientists often do what they call “back of the envelope calculations,” in
which they make very rough approximations just to see whether statements or ideas are true. Try doing
such a “quick and dirty” estimate for this statement with your group. What are the steps in comparing the
numbers of atoms contained in the two different tubes? What information do you need to make the
approximations? Can you find it in this text? And is the statement true?
E.
If your astronomy course has involved learning about the solar system before you got to this chapter,
have your group discuss where else besides interstellar clouds astronomers have been discovering
organic molecules (the chemical building blocks of life). How might the discoveries of such molecules in
our own solar system be related to the molecules in the clouds discussed in this chapter?
F.
Two stars both have a reddish appearance in telescopes. One star is actually red; the other’s light has
been reddened by interstellar dust on its way to us. Have your group make a list of the observations you
could perform to determine which star is which.
G.
You have been asked to give a talk to your little brother’s middle school class on astronomy, and you
decide to talk about how nature recycles gas and dust. Have your group discuss what images from this
book you would use in your talk. In what order? What is the one big idea you would like the students to
remember when the class is over?
H.
This chapter and the next (on The Birth of Stars) include some of the most beautiful images of nebulae
that glow with the light produced when starlight interacts with gas and dust. Have your group select one
to four of your favorite such nebulae and prepare a report on them to share with the rest of the class.
(Include such things as their location, distance, size, way they are glowing, and what is happening within
them.)
Exercises
Review Questions
1. Identify several dark nebulae in photographs in this chapter. Give the figure numbers of the photographs,
and specify where the dark nebulae are to be found on them.
2. Why do nebulae near hot stars look red? Why do dust clouds near stars usually look blue?
3. Describe the characteristics of the various kinds of interstellar gas (HII regions, neutral hydrogen clouds,
ultra-hot gas clouds, and molecular clouds).
4. Prepare a table listing the different ways in which dust and gas can be detected in interstellar space.
5. Describe how the 21-cm line of hydrogen is formed. Why is this line such an important tool for
understanding the interstellar medium?
6. Describe the properties of the dust grains found in the space between stars.
7. Why is it difficult to determine where cosmic rays come from?
8. What causes reddening of starlight? Explain how the reddish color of the Sun’s disk at sunset is caused by
the same process.
9. Why do molecules, including H2 and more complex organic molecules, only form inside dark clouds? Why
don’t they fill all interstellar space?
10. Why can’t we use visible light telescopes to study molecular clouds where stars and planets form? Why do
infrared or radio telescopes work better?
20 • Exercises
11. The mass of the interstellar medium is determined by a balance between sources (which add mass) and
sinks (which remove it). Make a table listing the major sources and sinks, and briefly explain each one.
12. Where does interstellar dust come from? How does it form?
Thought Questions
13. Figure 20.2 shows a reddish glow around the star Antares, and yet the caption says that is a dust cloud.
What observations would you make to determine whether the red glow is actually produced by dust or
whether it is produced by an H II region?
14. If the red glow around Antares is indeed produced by reflection of the light from Antares by dust, what
does its red appearance tell you about the likely temperature of Antares? Look up the spectral type of
Antares in Appendix J. Was your estimate of the temperature about right? In most of the images in this
chapter, a red glow is associated with ionized hydrogen. Would you expect to find an H II region around
Antares? Explain your answer.
15. Even though neutral hydrogen is the most abundant element in interstellar matter, it was detected first
with a radio telescope, not a visible light telescope. Explain why. (The explanation given in Analyzing
Starlight for the fact that hydrogen lines are not strong in stars of all temperatures may be helpful.)
16. The terms H II and H2 are both pronounced “H two.” What is the difference in meaning of those two
terms? Can there be such a thing as H III?
17. Suppose someone told you that she had discovered H II around the star Aldebaran. Would you believe
her? Why or why not?
18. Describe the spectrum of each of the following:
A.
starlight reflected by dust,
B.
a star behind invisible interstellar gas, and
C.
an emission nebula.
19. According to the text, a star must be hotter than about 25,000 K to produce an H II region. Both the
hottest white dwarfs and main-sequence O stars have temperatures hotter than 25,000 K. Which type of
star can ionize more hydrogen? Why?
20. From the comments in the text about which kinds of stars produce emission nebulae and which kinds are
associated with reflection nebulae, what can you say about the temperatures of the stars that produce
NGC 1999 (Figure 20.13)?
21. One way to calculate the size and shape of the Galaxy is to estimate the distances to faint stars just from
their observed apparent brightnesses and to note the distance at which stars are no longer observable.
The first astronomers to try this experiment did not know that starlight is dimmed by interstellar dust.
Their estimates of the size of the Galaxy were much too small. Explain why.
22. New stars form in regions where the density of gas and dust is relatively high. Suppose you wanted to
search for some recently formed stars. Would you more likely be successful if you observed at visible
wavelengths or at infrared wavelengths? Why?
23. Thinking about the topics in this chapter, here is an Earth analogy. In big cities, you can see much farther
on days without smog. Why?
24. Stars form in the Milky Way at a rate of about 1 solar mass per year. At this rate, how long would it take for
all the interstellar gas in the Milky Way to be turned into stars if there were no fresh gas coming in from
outside? How does this compare to the estimated age of the universe, 14 billion years? What do you
conclude from this?
20 • Exercises
25. The 21-cm line can be used not just to find out where hydrogen is located in the sky, but also to determine
how fast it is moving toward or away from us. Describe how this might work.
26. Astronomers recently detected light emitted by a supernova that was originally observed in 1572, just
reaching Earth now. This light was reflected off a dust cloud; astronomers call such a reflected light a
“light echo” (just like reflected sound is called an echo). How would you expect the spectrum of the light
echo to compare to that of the original supernova?
27. We can detect 21-cm emission from other galaxies as well as from our own Galaxy. However, 21-cm
emission from our own Galaxy fills most of the sky, so we usually see both at once. How can we
distinguish the extragalactic 21-cm emission from that arising in our own Galaxy? (Hint: Other galaxies are
generally moving relative to the Milky Way.)
28. We have said repeatedly that blue light undergoes more extinction than red light, which is true for visible
and shorter wavelengths. Is the same true for X-rays? Look at Figure 20.19. The most dust is in the galactic
plane in the middle of the image, and the red color in the image corresponds to the reddest (lowestenergy) light. Based on what you see in the galactic plane, are X-rays experiencing more extinction at
redder or bluer colors? You might consider comparing Figure 20.19 to Figure 20.14.
29. Suppose that, instead of being inside the Local Bubble, the Sun were deep inside a giant molecular cloud.
What would the night sky look like as seen from Earth at various wavelengths?
30. Suppose that, instead of being inside the Local Bubble, the Sun were inside an H II region. What would the
night sky look like at various wavelengths?
Figuring for Yourself
31. A molecular cloud is about 1000 times denser than the average of the interstellar medium. Let’s compare
this difference in densities to something more familiar. Air has a density of about 1 kg/m3, so something
1000 times denser than air would have a density of about 1000 kg/m3. How does this compare to the
typical density of water? Of granite? (You can find figures for these densities on the internet.) Is the
density difference between a molecular cloud and the interstellar medium larger or smaller than the
density difference between air and water or granite?
32. Would you expect to be able to detect an H II region in X-ray emission? Why or why not? (Hint: You might
apply Wien’s law)
33. Suppose that you gathered a ball of interstellar gas that was equal to the size of Earth (a radius of about
6000 km). If this gas has a density of 1 hydrogen atom per cm3, typical of the interstellar medium, how
would its mass compare to the mass of a bowling ball (5 or 6 kg)? How about if it had the typical density of
the Local Bubble, about 0.01 atoms per cm3? The volume of a sphere is V = (4/3)πR3.
34. At the average density of the interstellar medium, 1 atom per cm3, how big a volume of material must be
used to make a star with the mass of the Sun? What is the radius of a sphere this size? Express your
answer in light-years.
35. Consider a grain of sand that contains 1 mg of oxygen (a typical amount for a medium-sized sand grain,
since sand is mostly SiO2). How many oxygen atoms does the grain contain? What is the radius of the
sphere you would have to spread them out over if you wanted them to have the same density as the
interstellar medium, about 1 atom per cm3? You can look up the mass of an oxygen atom.
36. H II regions can exist only if there is a nearby star hot enough to ionize hydrogen. Hydrogen is ionized
only by radiation with wavelengths shorter than 91.2 nm. What is the temperature of a star that emits its
maximum energy at 91.2 nm? (Use Wien’s law from Radiation and Spectra.) Based on this result, what are
the spectral types of those stars likely to provide enough energy to produce H II regions?
20 • Exercises
37. In the text, we said that the five-times ionized oxygen (OVI) seen in hot gas must have been produced by
supernova shocks that heated the gas to millions of degrees, and not by starlight, the way H II is
produced. Producing OVI by light requires wavelengths shorter than 10.9 nm. The hottest observed stars
have surface temperatures of about 50,000 K. Could they produce OVI?
38. Dust was originally discovered because the stars in certain clusters seemed to be fainter than expected.
Suppose a star is behind a cloud of dust that dims its brightness by a factor of 100. Suppose you do not
realize the dust is there. How much in error will your distance estimate be? Can you think of any
measurement you might make to detect the dust?
39. How would the density inside a cold cloud (T = 10 K) compare with the density of the ultra-hot interstellar
gas (T = 106 K) if they were in pressure equilibrium? (It takes a large cloud to be able to shield its interior
from heating so that it can be at such a low temperature.) (Hint: In pressure equilibrium, the two regions
must have nT equal, where n is the number of particles per unit volume and T is the temperature.) Which
region do you think is more suitable for the creation of new stars? Why?
40. The text says that the Local Fluff, which surrounds the Sun, has a temperature of 7500 K and a density 0.1
atom per cm3. The Local Fluff is embedded in hot gas with a temperature of 106 K and a density of about
0.01 atom per cm3. Are they in equilibrium? (Hint: In pressure equilibrium, the two regions must have nT
equal, where n is the number of particles per unit volume and T is the temperature.) What is likely to
happen to the Local Fluff?
20 • Exercises
