Figure 27.1 Hubble Ultra-Deep Field. The deepest picture of the sky in visible light (left) shows huge numbers of galaxies in a
tiny patch of sky, only 1/100 the area of the full Moon. In contrast, the deepest picture of the sky taken in X-rays (right) shows large
numbers of point-like quasars, which astronomers have shown are supermassive black holes at the very centers of galaxies. (credit
left: modification of work by NASA, ESA, H. Teplitz and M. Rafelski (IPAC/Caltech), A. Koekemoer (STScI), R. Windhorst (Arizona State
University), and Z. Levay (STScI); credit right: modification of work by ESO/Mario Nonino, Piero Rosati, ESO GOODS Team)
Chapter Outline
27.1 Quasars
27.2 Supermassive Black Holes: What Quasars Really Are
27.3 Quasars as Probes of Evolution in the Universe
Thinking Ahead
During the first half of the twentieth century, astronomers viewed the universe of galaxies as a mostly
peaceful place. They assumed that galaxies formed billions of years ago and then evolved slowly as the
populations of stars within them formed, aged, and died. That placid picture completely changed in the last
few decades of the twentieth century.
Today, astronomers can see that the universe is often shaped by violent events, including cataclysmic
explosions of supernovae, collisions of whole galaxies, and the tremendous outpouring of energy as matter
interacts in the environment surrounding very massive black holes. The key event that began to change our
view of the universe was the discovery of a new class of objects: quasars.
27.1
Quasars
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how quasars were discovered
Explain how astronomers determined that quasars are at the distances implied by their redshifts
Justify the statement that the enormous amount of energy produced by quasars is generated in a very
small volume of space
Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
27 • Thinking Ahead
The name “quasars” started out as short for “quasi-stellar radio sources” (here “quasi-stellar” means “sort of
like stars”). The discovery of radio sources that appeared point-like, just like stars, came with the use of surplus
World War II radar equipment in the 1950s. Although few astronomers would have predicted it, the sky turned
out to be full of strong sources of radio waves. As they improved the images that their new radio telescopes
could make, scientists discovered that some radio sources were in the same location as faint blue “stars.” No
known type of star in our Galaxy emits such powerful radio radiation. What then were these “quasi-stellar
radio sources”?
Redshifts: The Key to Quasars
The answer came when astronomers obtained visible-light spectra of two of those faint “blue stars” that were
strong sources of radio waves (Figure 27.2). Spectra of these radio “stars” only deepened the mystery: they
had emission lines, but astronomers at first could not identify them with any known substance. By the 1960s,
astronomers had a century of experience in identifying elements and compounds in the spectra of stars.
Elaborate tables had been published showing the lines that each element would produce under a wide range
of conditions. A “star” with unidentifiable lines in the ordinary visible light spectrum had to be something
completely new.
Figure 27.2 Typical Quasar. The arrow in this image marks the quasar known by its catalog number, PKS 1117-248. Note that
nothing in this image distinguishes the quasar from an ordinary star. Its spectrum, however, shows that it is moving away from us at
a speed of 36% the speed of light, or 67,000 miles per second. In contrast, the maximum speed observed for any star is only a few
hundred miles per second. (credit: modification of work by WIYN Telescope, Kitt Peak National Observatory, NOAO)
In 1963 at Caltech’s Palomar Observatory, Maarten Schmidt (Figure 27.3) was puzzling over the spectrum of
one of the radio stars, which was named 3C 273 because it was the 273rd entry in the third Cambridge catalog
of radio sources (part (b) of Figure 27.3). There were strong emission lines in the spectrum, and Schmidt
recognized that they had the same spacing between them as the Balmer lines of hydrogen (see Radiation and
Spectra). But the lines in 3C 273 were shifted far to the red of the wavelengths at which the Balmer lines are
normally located. Indeed, these lines were at such long wavelengths that if the redshifts were attributed to the
Doppler effect, 3C 273 was receding from us at a speed of 45,000 kilometers per second, or about 15% the
speed of light! Since stars don’t show Doppler shifts this large, no one had thought of considering high
redshifts to be the cause of the strange spectra.
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
Figure 27.3 Quasar Pioneers and Quasar 3C 273. (a) Maarten Schmidt (left), who solved the puzzle of the quasar spectra in 1963,
shares a joke in this 1987 photo with Allan Sandage, who took the first spectrum of a quasar. Sandage was also instrumental in
measuring the value of Hubble’s constant. (b) This is the first quasar for which a redshift was measured. The redshift showed that
the light from it took about 2.5 billion years to reach us. Despite this great distance, it is still one of the quasars closest to the Milky
Way Galaxy. Note also the faint streak going toward the upper left from the quasar. Some quasars, like 3C 273, eject super-fast jets of
material. The jet from 3C 273 is about 200,000 light-years long. (credit a: modification of work by Andrew Fraknoi; credit b:
modification of work by ESA/Hubble/NASA)
The puzzling emission lines in other star-like radio sources were then reexamined to see if they, too, might be
well-known lines with large redshifts. This proved to be the case, but the other objects were found to be
receding from us at even greater speeds. Their astounding speeds showed that the radio “stars” could not
possibly be stars in our own Galaxy. Any true star moving at more than a few hundred kilometers per second
would be able to overcome the gravitational pull of the Galaxy and completely escape from it. (As we shall see
later in this chapter, astronomers eventually discovered that there was also more to these “stars” than just a
point of light.)
It turns out that these high-velocity objects only look like stars because they are compact and very far away.
Later, astronomers discovered objects with large redshifts that appear star-like but have no radio emission.
Observations also showed that quasars were bright in the infrared and X-ray bands too, and not all these X-ray
or infrared-bright quasars could be seen in either the radio or the visible-light bands of the spectrum. Today,
all these objects are referred to as quasi-stellar objects (QSOs), or, as they are more popularly known, quasars.
(The name was also soon appropriated by a manufacturer of home electronics.)
Read an interview (https://openstax.org/l/30SchmidtIntv) with Maarten Schmidt on the fiftieth anniversary
of his insight about the spectrum of quasars and their redshifts.
Over a million quasars have now been discovered, and spectra are available for over a hundred thousand. All
these spectra show redshifts, none show blueshifts, and their redshifts can be very large. Yet in a photo they
look just like stars (Figure 27.4).
LINK TO LEARNING
27.1 • Quasars
Figure 27.4 Typical Quasar Imaged by the Hubble Space Telescope. One of these two bright “stars” in the middle is in our Galaxy,
while the other is a quasar 9 billion light-years away. From this picture alone, there’s no way to say which is which. (The quasar is the
one in the center of the picture.) (credit: Charles Steidel (CIT)/NASA/ESA)
In the record-holding quasars, the first Lyman series line of hydrogen, with a laboratory wavelength of 121.5
nanometers in the ultraviolet portion of the spectrum, is shifted all the way through the visible region to the
infrared. At such high redshifts, the simple formula for converting a Doppler shift to speed (Radiation and
Spectra) must be modified to take into account the effects of the theory of relativity. If we apply the relativistic
form of the Doppler shift formula, we find that these redshifts correspond to velocities of about 96% of the
speed of light.
E X A M P L E 2 7. 1
Recession Speed of a Quasar
The formula for the Doppler shift, which astronomers denote by the letters z, is
where λ is the wavelength emitted by a source of radiation that is not moving, Δλ is the difference between
that wavelength and the wavelength we measure, v is the speed with which the source moves away, and c
(as usual) is the speed of light.
A line in the spectrum of a galaxy is at a wavelength of 393 nanometers (nm, or 10–9 m) when the source is
at rest. Let’s say the line is measured to be longer than this value (redshifted) by 7.86 nm. Then its redshift
, so its speed away from us is 2% of the speed of light
This formula is fine for galaxies that are relatively nearby and are moving away from us slowly in the
expansion of the universe. But the quasars and distant galaxies we discuss in this chapter are moving away
at speeds close to the speed of light. In that case, converting a Doppler shift (redshift) to a distance must
include the effects of the special theory of relativity, which explains how measurements of space and time
change when we see things moving at high speeds. The details of how this is done are way beyond the level
of this text, but we can share with you the relativistic formula for the Doppler shift:
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
Let’s do an example. Suppose a distant quasar has a redshift of 3. At what fraction of the speed of light is
the quasar moving away?
Solution
We calculate the following:
The quasar is thus receding from us at about 88% the speed of light.
Check Your Learning
Several lines of hydrogen absorption in the visible spectrum have rest wavelengths of 410 nm, 434 nm, 486
nm, and 656 nm. In a spectrum of a distant galaxy, these same lines are observed to have wavelengths of
492 nm, 521 nm, 583 nm, and 787 nm respectively. What is the redshift of this galaxy? What is the recession
speed of this galaxy?
Answer:
Because this is the same galaxy, we could pick any one of the four wavelengths and calculate how much it
has shifted. If we use a rest wavelength of 410 nm and compare it to the shifted wavelength of 492 nm, we
see that
In the classical view, this galaxy is receding at 20% of the speed of light; however, at 20% of the speed of
light, relativistic effects are starting to become important. So, using the relativistic Doppler equation, we
compute the true recession rate as
Therefore, the actual recession speed is only 18% of the speed of light. While this may not initially seem like
a big difference from the classical measurement, there is already an 11% deviation between the classical
and the relativistic solutions; and at greater recession speeds, the divergence between the classical and
relativistic speeds increases rapidly!
Quasars Obey the Hubble Law
The first question astronomers asked was whether quasars obeyed the Hubble law and were really at the large
distances implied by their redshifts. If they did not obey the rule that large redshift means large distance, then
they could be much closer, and their luminosity could be a lot less. One straightforward way to show that
quasars had to obey the Hubble law was to demonstrate that they were actually part of galaxies, and that their
redshift was the same as the galaxy that hosted them. Since ordinary galaxies do obey the Hubble law,
anything within them would be subject to the same rules.
Observations with the Hubble Space Telescope provided the strongest evidence showing that quasars are
located at the centers of galaxies. Hints that this is true had been obtained with ground-based telescopes, but
space observations were required to make a convincing case. The reason is that quasars can outshine their
entire galaxies by factors of 10 to 100 or even more. When this light passes through Earth’s atmosphere, it is
blurred by turbulence and drowns out the faint light from the surrounding galaxy—much as the bright
headlights from an oncoming car at night make it difficult to see anything close by.
27.1 • Quasars
The Hubble Space Telescope, however, is not affected by atmospheric turbulence and can detect the faint glow
from some of the galaxies that host quasars (Figure 27.5). Quasars have been found in the cores of both spiral
and elliptical galaxies, and each quasar has the same redshift as its host galaxy. A wide range of studies with
the Hubble Space Telescope now clearly demonstrate that quasars are indeed far away. If so, they must be
producing a truly impressive amount of energy to be detectable as points of light that are much brighter than
their galaxy. Interestingly, many quasar host galaxies are found to be involved in a collision with a second
galaxy, providing, as we shall see, an important clue to the source of their prodigious energy output.
Figure 27.5 Quasar Host Galaxies. The Hubble Space Telescope reveals the much fainter “host” galaxies around quasars. The top
left image shows a quasar that lies at the heart of a spiral galaxy 1.4 billion light-years from Earth. The bottom left image shows a
quasar that lies at the center of an elliptical galaxy some 1.5 billion light-years from us. The middle images show remote pairs of
interacting galaxies, one of which harbors a quasar. Each of the right images shows long tails of gas and dust streaming away from a
galaxy that contains a quasar. Such tails are produced when one galaxy collides with another. (credit: modification of work by John
Bahcall, Mike Disney, NASA)
The Size of the Energy Source
Given their large distances, quasars have to be extremely luminous to be visible to us at all—far brighter than
any normal galaxy. In visible light alone, most are far more energetic than the brightest elliptical galaxies. But,
as we saw, quasars also emit energy at X-ray and ultraviolet wavelengths, and some are radio sources as well.
When all their radiation is added together, some QSOs have total luminosities as large as a hundred trillion
Suns (1014 LSun), which is 10 to 100 times the brightness of luminous elliptical galaxies.
Finding a mechanism to produce the large amount of energy emitted by a quasar would be difficult under any
circumstances. But there is an additional problem. When astronomers began monitoring quasars carefully,
they found that some vary in luminosity on time scales of months, weeks, or even, in some cases, days. This
variation is irregular and can change the brightness of a quasar by a few tens of percent in both its visible light
and radio output.
Think about what such a change in luminosity means. A quasar at its dimmest is still more brilliant than any
normal galaxy. Now imagine that the brightness increases by 30% in a few weeks. Whatever mechanism is
responsible must be able to release new energy at rates that stagger our imaginations. The most dramatic
changes in quasar brightness are equivalent to the energy released by 100,000 billion Suns. To produce this
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
much energy we would have to convert the total mass of about ten Earths into energy every minute.
Moreover, because the fluctuations occur in such short times, the part of a quasar that is varying must be
smaller than the distance light travels in the time it takes the variation to occur—typically a few months. To see
why this must be so, let’s consider a cluster of stars 10 light-years in diameter at a very large distance from
Earth (see Figure 27.6, in which Earth is off to the right). Suppose every star in this cluster somehow brightens
simultaneously and remains bright. When the light from this event arrives at Earth, we would first see the
brighter light from stars on the near side; 5 years later we would see increased light from stars at the center.
Ten years would pass before we detected more light from stars on the far side.
Figure 27.6 How the Size of a Source Affects the Timescale of Its Variability. This diagram shows why light variations from a
large region in space appear to last for an extended period of time as viewed from Earth. Suppose all the stars in this cluster, which
is 10 light-years across, brighten simultaneously and instantaneously. From Earth, star A will appear to brighten 5 years before star
B, which in turn will appear to brighten 5 years earlier than star C. It will take 10 years for an Earth observer to get the full effect of
the brightening.
Even though all stars in the cluster brightened at the same time, the fact that the cluster is 10 light-years wide
means that 10 years must elapse before the increased light from every part of the cluster reaches us. From
Earth we would see the cluster get brighter and brighter, as light from more and more stars began to reach
us. Not until 10 years after the brightening began would we see the cluster reach maximum brightness. In
other words, if an extended object suddenly flares up, it will seem to brighten over a period of time equal to
the time it takes light to travel across the object from its far side.
We can apply this idea to brightness changes in quasars to estimate their diameters. Because quasars typically
vary (get brighter and dimmer) over periods of a few months, the region where the energy is generated can
be no larger than a few light-months across. If it were larger, it would take longer than a few months for the
light from the far side to reach us.
How large is a region of a few light-months? Pluto, usually the outermost (dwarf) planet in our solar system, is
about 5.5 light-hours from us, while the nearest star is 4 light-years away. Clearly a region a few light months
across is tiny relative to the size of the entire Galaxy. And some quasars vary even more rapidly, which means
their energy is generated in an even smaller region. Whatever mechanism powers the quasars must be able to
generate more energy than that produced by an entire galaxy in a volume of space that, in some cases, is not
much larger than our solar system.
Earlier Evidence
Even before the discovery of quasars, there had been hints that something very strange was going on in the
centers of at least some galaxies. Back in 1918, American astronomer Heber Curtis used the large Lick
Observatory telescope to photograph the galaxy Messier 87 in the constellation Virgo. On that photograph, he
saw what we now call a jet coming from the center, or nucleus, of the galaxy (Figure 27.7). This jet literally and
figuratively pointed to some strange activity going on in that galaxy nucleus. But he had no idea what it was.
27.1 • Quasars
No one else knew what to do with this space oddity either.
The random factoid that such a central jet existed lay around for a quarter century, until Carl Seyfert, a young
astronomer at Mount Wilson Observatory, also in California, found half a dozen galaxies with extremely bright
nuclei that were almost stellar, rather than fuzzy in appearance like most galaxy nuclei. Using spectroscopy, he
found that these nuclei contain gas moving at up to two percent the speed of light. That may not sound like
much, but it is 6 million miles per hour, and more than 10 times faster than the typical motions of stars in
galaxies.
Figure 27.7 M87 Jet. Streaming out like a cosmic searchlight from the center of the galaxy, M87 is one of nature’s most amazing
phenomena, a huge jet of electrons and other particles traveling at nearly the speed of light. In this Hubble Space Telescope image,
the blue of the jet contrasts with the yellow glow from the combined light of billions of unseen stars and yellow, point-like globular
clusters that make up the galaxy (at the upper left). As we shall see later in this chapter, the jet, which is several thousand light-years
long, originates in a disk of superheated gas swirling around a giant black hole at the center of M87. The light that we see is
produced by electrons twisting along magnetic field lines in the jet, a process known as synchrotron radiation, which gives the jet its
bluish tint. The jet in M87 can be observed in X-ray, radio, and visible light, as shown in the bottom three images. At the extreme left
of each bottom image, we see the bright galactic nucleus harboring a supermassive black hole. (credit top: modification of work by
NASA, The Hubble Heritage Team(STScI/AURA); credit bottom: modification of work by X-ray: H. Marshall (MIT), et al., CXC, NASA;
Radio: F. Zhou, F. Owen (NRAO), J. Biretta (STScI); Optical: E. Perlman (UMBC), et al.)
After decades of study, astronomers identified many other strange objects beyond our Milky Way Galaxy; they
populate a whole “zoo” of what are now called active galaxies or active galactic nuclei (AGN). Astronomers
first called them by many different names, depending on what sorts of observations discovered each category,
but now we know that we are always looking at the same basic mechanism. What all these galaxies have in
common is some activity in their nuclei that produces an enormous amount of energy in a very small volume
of space. In the next section, we describe a model that explains all these galaxies with strong central
activity—both the AGNs and the QSOs.
To see a jet for yourself, check out a time-lapse video (https://openstax.org/l/30timelapsejet) of the jet
ejected from NGC 3862.
LINK TO LEARNING
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
27.2
Supermassive Black Holes: What Quasars Really Are
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the characteristics common to all quasars
Justify the claim that supermassive black holes are the source of the energy emitted by quasars (and
AGNs)
Explain how a quasar’s energy is produced
In order to find a common model for quasars (and their cousins, the AGNs), let’s first list the common
characteristics we have been describing—and add some new ones:
•
Quasars are hugely powerful, emitting more power in radiated light than all the stars in our Galaxy
combined.
•
Quasars are tiny, about the size of our solar system (to astronomers, that is really small!).
•
Some quasars are observed to be shooting out pairs of straight jets at close to the speed of light, in a tight
beam, to distances far beyond the galaxies they live in. These jets are themselves powerful sources of
radio and gamma-ray radiation.
•
Because quasars put out so much power from such a small region, they can’t be powered by nuclear
fusion the way stars are; they must use some process that is far more efficient.
•
As we shall see later in this chapter, quasars were much more common when the universe was young
than they are today. That means they must have been able to form in the first billion years or so after the
universe began to expand.
The readers of this text are in a much better position than the astronomers who discovered quasars in the
1960s to guess what powers the quasars. That’s because the key idea in solving the puzzle came from
observations of the black holes we discussed in Black Holes and Curved Spacetime. The discovery of the first
stellar mass black hole in the binary system Cygnus X-1 was announced in 1971, several years after the
discovery of quasars. Proof that there is a black hole at the center of our own Galaxy came even later. Back
when astronomers first began trying to figure out what powered quasars, black holes were simply one of the
more exotic predictions of the general theory of relativity that still waited to be connected to the real world.
It was only as proof of the existence of black holes accumulated over several decades that it became clearer
that only supermassive black holes could account for all the observed properties of quasars and AGNs. As we
saw in The Milky Way Galaxy, our own Galaxy has a black hole in its center, and the energy is emitted from a
small central region. While our black hole doesn’t have the mass or energy of the quasar black holes, the
mechanism that powers them is similar. The evidence now shows that most—and probably all—elliptical
galaxies and all spirals with nuclear bulges have black holes at their centers. The amount of energy emitted by
material near the black hole depends on two things: the mass of the black hole and the amount of matter that
is falling into it.
If a black hole with a billion Suns’ worth of mass inside (109 MSun) accretes (gathers) even a relatively modest
amount of additional material—say, about 10 MSun per year—then (as we shall see) it can, in the process,
produce as much energy as a thousand normal galaxies. This is enough to account for the total energy of a
quasar. If the mass of the black hole is smaller than a billion solar masses or the accretion rate is low, then the
amount of energy emitted can be much smaller, as it is in the case of the Milky Way.
Watch a video (https://openstax.org/l/30mataccrsupblh) of an artist’s impression of matter accreting
LINK TO LEARNING
27.2 • Supermassive Black Holes: What Quasars Really Are
around a supermassive black hole.
Observational Evidence for Black Holes
In order to prove that a black hole is present at the center of a galaxy, we must demonstrate that so much
mass is crammed into so small a volume that no normal objects—massive stars or clusters of stars—could
possibly account for it (just as we did for the black hole in the Milky Way). We already know from observations
(discussed in Black Holes and Curved Spacetime) that an accreting black hole is surrounded by a hot accretion
disk with gas and dust that swirl around the black hole before it falls in.
If we assume that the energy emitted by quasars is also produced by a hot accretion disk, then, as we saw in
the previous section, the size of the disk must be given by the time the quasar energy takes to vary. For
quasars, the emission in visible light varies on typical time scales of 5 to 2000 days, limiting the size of the disk
to that many light-days.
In the X-ray band, quasars vary even more rapidly, so the light travel time argument tells us that this more
energetic radiation is generated in an even smaller region. Therefore, the mass around which the accretion
disk is swirling must be confined to a space that is even smaller. If the quasar mechanism involves a great deal
of mass, then the only astronomical object that can confine a lot of mass into a very small space is a black hole.
In a few cases, it turns out that the X-rays are emitted from a region just a few times the size of the black hole
event horizon.
The next challenge, then, is to “weigh” this central mass in a quasar. In the case of our own Galaxy, we used
observations of the orbits of stars very close to the galactic center, along with Kepler’s third law, to estimate
the mass of the central black hole (The Milky Way Galaxy). In the case of distant galaxies, we cannot measure
the orbits of individual stars, but we can measure the orbital speed of the gas in the rotating accretion disk.
The Hubble Space Telescope is especially well suited to this task because it is above the blurring of Earth’s
atmosphere and can obtain spectra very close to the bright central regions of active galaxies. The Doppler
effect is then used to measure radial velocities of the orbiting material and so derive the speed with which it
moves around.
One of the first galaxies to be studied with the Hubble Space Telescope is our old favorite, the giant elliptical
M87. Hubble Space Telescope images showed that there is a disk of hot (10,000 K) gas swirling around the
center of M87 (Figure 27.8). It was surprising to find hot gas in an elliptical galaxy because this type of galaxy is
usually devoid of gas and dust. But the discovery was extremely useful for pinning down the existence of the
black hole. Astronomers measured the Doppler shift of spectral lines emitted by this gas, found its speed of
rotation, and then used the speed to derive the amount of mass inside the disk—applying Kepler’s third law.
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
Figure 27.8 Evidence for a Black Hole at the Center of M87. (a) The disk of whirling gas at right was discovered at the center of the
giant elliptical galaxy M87 with the Hubble Space Telescope. Observations made on opposite sides of the disk show that one side is
approaching us (the spectral lines are blueshifted by the Doppler effect) while the other is receding (lines redshifted), a clear
indication that the disk is rotating. The rotation speed is about 550 kilometers per second or 1.2 million miles per hour. Such a high
rotation speed is evidence that there is a very massive black hole at the center of M87. (b) By 2019, the Event Horizon Telescope, a
collaborative venture among radio telescopes spanning our planet, was able to produce the first radio image of the shadow of the
M87 black hole on the accretion disk surrounding it. This was taken with radio waves, so color is arbitrary. The shadow is about 2 ½
times as big as the event horizon of the supermassive black hole. (credit (a): modification of work by Holland Ford, STScI/JHU;
Richard Harms, Linda Dressel, Ajay K. Kochhar, Applied Research Corp.; Zlatan Tsvetanov, Arthur Davidsen, Gerard Kriss, Johns
Hopkins; Ralph Bohlin, George Hartig, STScI; Bruce Margon, University of Washington in Seattle; NASA; credit (b): modification of
work by European Southern Observatory (ESO), Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration)
Modern estimates show that there is a mass of at least 3.5 billion MSun concentrated in a tiny region at the very
center of M87. So much mass in such a small volume of space must be a black hole. Let’s stop for a moment
and take in this figure: a single black hole that has swallowed enough material to make 3.5 billion stars like the
Sun. Few astronomical measurements have ever led to so mind-boggling a result. What a strange environment
the neighborhood of such a supermassive black hole must be.
Another example is shown in Figure 27.9. Here, we see a disk of dust and gas that surrounds a
300-million-MSun black hole in the center of an elliptical galaxy. (The bright spot in the center is produced by
the combined light of stars that have been pulled close together by the gravitational force of the black hole.)
The mass of the black hole was again derived from measurements of the rotational speed of the disk. The gas
in the disk is moving around at 155 kilometers per second at a distance of only 186 light-years from its center.
Given the pull of the mass at the center, we expect that the whole dust disk should be swallowed by the black
hole in several billion years.
27.2 • Supermassive Black Holes: What Quasars Really Are
Figure 27.9 Another Galaxy with a Black-Hole Disk. The ground-based image shows an elliptical galaxy called NGC 7052 located in
the constellation of Vulpecula, almost 200 million light-years from Earth. At the galaxy’s center (right) is a dust disk roughly 3700
light-years in diameter. The disk rotates like a giant merry-go-round: gas in the inner part (186 light-years from the center) whirls
around at a speed of 155 kilometers per second (341,000 miles per hour). From these measurements and Kepler’s third law, it is
possible to estimate that the disk is orbiting around a central black hole with a mass of 300 million Suns. (credit: modification of work
by Roeland P. van der Marel (STScI), Frank C. van den Bosch (University of Washington), NASA)
But do we have to accept black holes as the only explanation of what lies at the center of these galaxies? What
else could we put in such a small space other than a giant black hole? The alternative is stars. But to explain
the masses in the centers of galaxies without a black hole we need to put at least a million stars in a region the
size of the solar system. To fit, they would have be only 2 star diameters apart. Collisions between stars would
happen all the time. And these collisions would lead to mergers of stars, and very soon the one giant star that
they form would collapse into a black hole. So there is really no escape: only a black hole can fit so much mass
into so small a space.
As we saw earlier, observations now show that all the galaxies with a spherical concentration of stars—either
elliptical galaxies or spiral galaxies with nuclear bulges (see the chapter on Galaxies)—harbor one of these
giant black holes at their centers. Among them is our neighbor spiral galaxy, the Andromeda galaxy, M31. The
masses of these central black holes range from a just under a million up to at least 30 billion times the mass of
the Sun. Several black holes may be even more massive, but the mass estimates have large uncertainties and
need verification. We call these black holes “supermassive” to distinguish them from the much smaller black
holes that form when some stars die (see The Death of Stars). So far, the most massive black holes from
stars—those detected through gravitational waves detected by LIGO—have masses of about 40 solar masses.
Energy Production around a Black Hole
By now, you may be willing to entertain the idea that huge black holes lurk at the centers of active galaxies.
But we still need to answer the question of how such a black hole can account for one of the most powerful
sources of energy in the universe. As we saw in Black Holes and Curved Spacetime, a black hole itself can
radiate no energy. Any energy we detect from it must come from material very close to the black hole, but not
inside its event horizon.
In a galaxy, a central black hole (with its strong gravity) attracts matter—stars, dust, and gas—orbiting in the
dense nuclear regions. This matter spirals in toward the spinning black hole and forms an accretion disk of
material around it. As the material spirals ever closer to the black hole, it accelerates and becomes
compressed, heating up to temperatures of millions of degrees. Such hot matter can radiate prodigious
amounts of energy as it falls in toward the black hole.
To convince yourself that falling into a region with strong gravity can release a great deal of energy, imagine
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
dropping a printed version of your astronomy textbook out the window of the ground floor of the library. It
will land with a thud, and maybe give a surprised pigeon a nasty bump, but the energy released by its fall will
not be very great. Now take the same book up to the fifteenth floor of a tall building and drop it from there.
For anyone below, astronomy could suddenly become a deadly subject; when the book hits, it does so with a
great deal of energy.
Dropping things from far away into the much stronger gravity of a black hole is much more effective in turning
the energy released by infall into other forms of energy. Just as the falling book can heat up the air, shake the
ground, or produce sound energy that can be heard some distance away, so the energy of material falling
toward a black hole can be converted to significant amounts of electromagnetic radiation.
What a black hole has to work with is not textbooks but streams of infalling gas. If a dense blob of gas moves
through a thin gas at high speed, it heats up as it slows by friction. As it slows down, kinetic (motion) energy is
turned into heat energy. Just like a spaceship reentering the atmosphere (Figure 27.10), gas approaching a
black hole heats up and glows where it meets other gas. But this gas, as it approaches the event horizon,
reaches speeds of 10% the speed of light and more. It therefore gets far, far hotter than a spaceship, which
reaches no more than about 1500 K. Indeed, gas near a supermassive black hole reaches a temperature of
about 150,000 K, about 100 times hotter than a spaceship returning to Earth. It can even get so hot—millions
of degrees—that it radiates X-rays.
Figure 27.10 Friction in Earth’s Atmosphere. In this artist’s impression, the rapid motion of a spacecraft (the Apollo mission
reentry capsule) through the atmosphere compresses and heats the air ahead of it, which heats the spacecraft in turn until it glows
red hot. Pushing on the air slows down the spacecraft, turning the kinetic energy of the spacecraft into heat. Fast-moving gas falling
into a quasar heats up in a similar way. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
The amount of energy that can be liberated this way is enormous. Einstein showed that mass and energy are
interchangeable with his famous formula E = mc2 (see The Sun: A Nuclear Powerhouse). A hydrogen bomb
releases just 1% of that energy, as does a star. Quasars are much more efficient than that. The energy released
falling to the event horizon of a black hole can easily reach 10% or, in the extreme theoretical limit, 32%, of that
energy. (Unlike the hydrogen atoms in a bomb or a star, the gas falling into the black hole is not actually losing
mass from its atoms to free up the energy; the energy is produced just because the gas is falling closer and
closer to the black hole.) This huge energy release explains how a tiny volume like the region around a black
hole can release as much power as a whole galaxy. But to radiate all that energy, instead of just falling inside
the event horizon with barely a peep, the hot gas must take the time to swirl around the star in the accretion
disk and emit some of its energy.
Most black holes don’t show any signs of quasar emission. We call them “quiescent.” But, like sleeping
dragons, they can be woken up by being roused with a fresh supply of gas. Our own Milky Way black hole is
currently quiescent, but it may have been a quasar just a few million years ago (Figure 27.11). Two giant
bubbles that extend 25,000 light-years above and below the galactic center are emitting gamma rays. Were
27.2 • Supermassive Black Holes: What Quasars Really Are
these produced a few million years ago when a significant amount of matter fell into the black hole at the
center of the galaxy? Astronomers are still working to understand what remarkable event might have formed
these enormous bubbles.
Figure 27.11 Fermi Bubbles in the Galaxy. Giant bubbles shining in gamma-ray light lie above and below the center of the Milky
Way Galaxy, as seen by the Fermi satellite. (The gamma-ray and X-ray image is superimposed on a visible-light image of the inner
parts of our Galaxy.) The bubbles may be evidence that the supermassive black hole at the center of our Galaxy was a quasar a few
million years ago. (credit: modification of work by NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center)
The physics required to account for the exact way in which the energy of infalling material is converted to
radiation near a black hole is far more complicated than our simple discussion suggests. To understand what
happens in the “rough and tumble” region around a massive black hole, astronomers and physicists must
resort to computer simulations (and they require supercomputers, fast machines capable of awesome
numbers of calculations per second). The details of these models are beyond the scope of our book, but they
support the basic description presented here.
Radio Jets
So far, our model seems to explain the central energy source in quasars and active galaxies. But, as we have
seen, there is more to quasars and other active galaxies than the point-like energy source. They can also have
long jets that glow with radio waves, light, and sometimes even X-rays, and that extend far beyond the limits of
the parent galaxy. Can we find a way for our black hole and its accretion disk to produce these jets of energetic
particles as well?
Many different observations have now traced these jets to within 3 to 30 light-years of the parent quasar or
galactic nucleus. While the black hole and accretion disk are typically smaller than 1 light-year, we nevertheless
presume that if the jets come this close, they probably originate in the vicinity of the black hole. Another
characteristic of the jets we need to explain is that they contain matter moving close to the speed of light.
Why are energetic electrons and other particles near a supermassive black hole ejected into jets, and often
into two oppositely directed jets, rather than in all directions? Again, we must use theoretical models and
supercomputer simulations of what happens when a lot of material whirls inward in a crowded black hole
accretion disk. Although there is no agreement on exactly how jets form, it has become clear that any material
escaping from the neighborhood of the black hole has an easier time doing so perpendicular to the disk.
In some ways, the inner regions of black hole accretion disks resemble a baby that is just learning to eat by
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
herself. As much food as goes into the baby’s mouth can sometimes wind up being spit out in various
directions. In the same way, some of the material whirling inward toward a black hole finds itself under
tremendous pressure and orbiting with tremendous speed. Under such conditions, simulations show that a
significant amount of material can be flung outward—not back along the disk, where more material is
crowding in, but above and below the disk. If the disk is thick (as it tends to be when a lot of material falls in
quickly), it can channel the outrushing material into narrow beams perpendicular to the disk (Figure 27.12).
Figure 27.12 Models of Accretion Disks. These schematic drawings show what accretion disks might look like around large black
holes for (a) a thin accretion disk and (b) a “fat” disk—the type needed to account for channeling the outflow of hot material into
narrow jets oriented perpendicular to the disk.
Figure 27.13 shows observations of an elliptical galaxy that behaves in exactly this way. At the center of this
active galaxy, there is a ring of dust and gas about 400 light-years in diameter, surrounding a 1.2-billion-MSun
black hole. Radio observations show that two jets emerge in a direction perpendicular to the ring, just as the
model predicts.
27.2 • Supermassive Black Holes: What Quasars Really Are
Figure 27.13 Jets and Disk in an Active Galaxy. The picture on the left shows the active elliptical galaxy NGC 4261, which is located
in the Virgo Cluster at a distance of about 100 million light-years. The galaxy itself—the white circular region in the center—is shown
the way it looks in visible light, while the jets are seen at radio wavelengths. A Hubble Space Telescope image of the central portion
of the galaxy is shown on the right. It contains a ring of dust and gas about 800 light-years in diameter, surrounding a supermassive
black hole. Note that the jets emerge from the galaxy in a direction perpendicular to the plane of the ring. (credit: modification of
work by ESA/HST)
Quasars and the Attitudes of Astronomers
The discovery of quasars in the early 1960s was the first in a series of surprises astronomers had in store.
Within another decade they would find neutron stars (in the form of pulsars), the first hints of black holes
(in binary X-ray sources), and even the radio echo of the Big Bang itself. Many more new discoveries lay
ahead.
As Maarten Schmidt reminisced in 1988, “This had, I believe, a profound impact on the conduct of those
practicing astronomy. Before the 1960s, there was much authoritarianism in the field. New ideas expressed
at meetings would be instantly judged by senior astronomers and rejected if too far out.” We saw a good
example of this in the trouble Chandrasekhar had in finding acceptance for his ideas about the death of
stars with cores greater than 1.4 MSun (see the feature box on Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar).
“The discoveries of the 1960s,” Schmidt continued, “were an embarrassment, in the sense that they were
totally unexpected and could not be evaluated immediately. In reaction to these developments, an attitude
has evolved where even outlandish ideas in astronomy are taken seriously. Given our lack of solid
knowledge in extragalactic astronomy, this is probably to be preferred over authoritarianism.”1
That is not to say that astronomers (being human) don’t continue to have prejudices and preferences. For
example, a small group of astronomers who thought that the redshifts of quasars were not connected with
their distances (which was definitely a minority opinion) often felt excluded from meetings or from access
to telescopes in the 1960s and 1970s. It’s not so clear that they actually were excluded, as much as that they
felt the very difficult pressure of knowing that most of their colleagues strongly disagreed with them. As it
MAKING CONNECTIONS
M. Schmidt, “The Discovery of Quasars,” in Modern Cosmology in Retrospect, ed. B. Bertotti et al. (Cambridge University Press,
1990).
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
turned out, the evidence—which must ultimately decide all scientific questions—was not on their side
either.
But today, as better instruments bring solutions to some problems and starkly illuminate our ignorance
about others, the entire field of astronomy seems more open to discussing unusual ideas. Of course, before
any hypotheses become accepted, they must be tested—again and again—against the evidence that nature
itself reveals. Still, the many strange proposals published about what dark matter might be (see The
Evolution and Distribution of Galaxies) attest to the new openness that Schmidt described.
With this black hole model, we have come a long way toward understanding the quasars and active galaxies
that seemed very mysterious only a few decades ago. As often happens in astronomy, a combination of better
instruments (making better observations) and improved theoretical models enabled us to make significant
progress on a puzzling aspect of the cosmos.
27.3
Quasars as Probes of Evolution in the Universe
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Trace the rise and fall of quasars over cosmic time
Describe some of the ways in which galaxies and black holes influence each other’s growth
Describe some ways the first black holes may have formed
Explain why some black holes are not producing quasar emission but rather are quiescent
The quasars’ brilliance and large distance make them ideal probes of the far reaches of the universe and its
remote past. Recall that when first introducing quasars, we mentioned that they generally tend to be far away.
When we see extremely distant objects, we are seeing them as they were long ago. Radiation from a quasar 8
billion light-years away is telling us what that quasar and its environment were like 8 billion years ago, much
closer to the time that the galaxy that surrounds it first formed. Astronomers have now detected light emitted
from quasars that were already formed only a few hundred million years after the universe began its
expansion 13.8 billion years ago. Thus, they give us a remarkable opportunity to learn about the time when
large structures were first assembling in the cosmos.
The Evolution of Quasars
Quasars provide compelling evidence that we live in an evolving universe—one that changes with time. They
tell us that astronomers living billions of years ago would have seen a universe that is very different from the
universe of today. Counts of the number of quasars at different redshifts (and thus at different times in the
evolution of the universe) show us how dramatic these changes are (Figure 27.14). We now know that the
number of quasars was greatest at the time when the universe was only 20% of its present age.
27.3 • Quasars as Probes of Evolution in the Universe
Figure 27.14 Relative Number of Quasars and Rate at Which Stars Formed as a Function of the Age of the Universe. An age of
0 on the plots corresponds to the beginning of the universe; an age of 13.8 corresponds to the present time. Both the number of
quasars and the rate of star formation were at a peak when the universe was about 20% as old as it is now.
As you can see, the drop-off in the numbers of quasars as time gets nearer to the present day is quite abrupt.
Observations also show that the emission from the accretion disks around the most massive black holes peaks
early and then fades. The most powerful quasars are seen only at early times. In order to explain this result,
we make use of our model of the energy source of the quasars—namely that quasars are black holes with
enough fuel to make a brilliant accretion disk right around them.
The fact that there were more quasars long ago (far away) than there are today (nearby) could be explained if
there was more material available to be accreted by black holes early in the history of the universe. You might
say that the quasars were more active when their black holes had fuel for their “energy-producing engines.” If
that fuel was mostly consumed in the first few billion years after the universe began its expansion, then later
in its life, a “hungry” black hole would have very little left with which to light up the galaxy’s central regions.
In other words, if matter in the accretion disk is continually being depleted by falling into the black hole or
being blown out from the galaxy in the form of jets, then a quasar can continue to radiate only as long as new
gas is available to replenish the accretion disk.
In fact, there was more gas around to be accreted early in the history of the universe. Back then, most gas had
not yet collapsed to form stars, so there was more fuel available for both the feeding of black holes and the
forming of new stars. Much of that fuel was subsequently consumed in the formation of stars during the first
few billion years after the universe began its expansion. Later in its life, a galaxy would have little left to feed a
hungry black hole or to form more new stars. As we see from Figure 27.14, both star formation and black hole
growth peaked together when the universe was about 2 billion years old. Ever since, both have been in sharp
decline. We are late to the party of the galaxies and have missed some of the early excitement.
Observations of nearer galaxies (seen later in time) indicate that there is another source of fuel for the central
black holes—the collision of galaxies. If two galaxies of similar mass collide and merge, or if a smaller galaxy is
pulled into a larger one, then gas and dust from one may come close enough to the black hole in the other to
be devoured by it and so provide the necessary fuel. Astronomers have found that collisions were also much
more common early in the history of the universe than they are today. There were more small galaxies in
those early times because over time, as we shall see (in The Evolution and Distribution of Galaxies), small
galaxies tend to combine into larger ones. Again, this means that we would expect to see more quasars long
ago (far away) than we do today (nearby)—as we in fact do.
Codependence of Black Holes and Galaxies
Once black hole masses began to be measured reliably in the late 1990s, they posed an enigma. It looked as
though the mass of the central black hole depended on the mass of the galaxy. The black holes in galaxies
always seem to be just 1/200 the mass of the galaxy they live in. This result is shown schematically in Figure
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
27.15, and some of the observations are plotted in Figure 27.16.
Figure 27.15 Relationship between Black Hole Mass and the Mass of the Host Galaxy. Observations show that there is a close
correlation between the mass of the black hole at the center of a galaxy and the mass of the spherical distribution of stars that
surrounds the black hole. That spherical distribution may be in the form of either an elliptical galaxy or the central bulge of a spiral
galaxy. (credit: modification of work by K. Cordes, S. Brown (STScI))
Figure 27.16 Correlation between the Mass of the Central Black Hole and the Mass Contained within the Bulge of Stars
Surrounding the Black Hole, Using Data from Real Galaxies. The black hole always turns out to be about 1/200 the mass of the
stars surrounding it. The horizontal and vertical bars surrounding each point show the uncertainty of the measurement. (credit:
modification of work by Nicholas J. McConnell, Chung-Pei Ma, “Revisiting the Scaling Relations of Black Hole Masses and Host Galaxy
Properties,” The Astrophysical Journal, 764:184 (14 pp.), February 20, 2013.)
Somehow black hole mass and the mass of the surrounding bulge of stars are connected. But why does this
correlation exist? Unfortunately, astronomers do not yet know the answer to this question. We do know,
however, that the black hole can influence the rate of star formation in the galaxy, and that the properties of
the surrounding galaxy can influence how fast the black hole grows. Let’s see how these processes work.
27.3 • Quasars as Probes of Evolution in the Universe
How a Galaxy Can Influence a Black Hole in Its Center
Let’s look first at how the surrounding galaxy might influence the growth and size of the black hole. Without
large quantities of fresh “food,” the surroundings of black holes glow only weakly as bits of local material
spiral inward toward the black hole. So somehow large amounts of gas have to find their way to the black hole
from the galaxy in order to feed the quasar and make it grow and give off the energy to be noticed. Where
does this “food” for the black hole come from originally and how might it be replenished? The jury is still out,
but the options are pretty clear.
One obvious source of fuel for the black hole is matter from the host galaxy itself. Galaxies start out with large
amounts of interstellar gas and dust, and at least some of this interstellar matter is gradually converted into
stars as the galaxy evolves. On the other hand, as stars go through their lives and die, they lose mass all the
time into the space between them, thereby returning some of the gas and dust to the interstellar medium. We
expect to find more gas and dust in the central regions early in a galaxy’s life than later on, when much of it
has been converted into stars. Any of the interstellar matter that ventures too close to the black hole may be
accreted by it. This means that we would expect that the number and luminosity of quasars powered in this
way would decline with time. And as we have seen, that is just what we find.
Today both elliptical galaxies and the nuclear bulges of spiral galaxies have very little raw material left to serve
as a source of fuel for the black hole. And most of the giant black holes in nearby galaxies, including the one in
our own Milky Way, are now dark and relatively quiet—mere shadows of their former selves. So that fits with
our observations.
We should note that even if you have a quiescent supermassive black hole, a star in the area could occasionally
get close to it. Then the powerful tidal forces of the black hole can pull the whole star apart into a stream of
gas. This stream quickly forms an accretion disk that gives off energy in the normal way and makes the black
hole region into a temporary quasar. However, the material will fall into the black hole after only a few weeks
or months. The black hole then goes back into its lurking, quiescent state, until another victim wanders by.
This sort of “cannibal” event happens only once every 100,000 years or so in a typical galaxy. But we can
monitor millions of galaxies in the sky, so a few of these “tidal disruption events” are found each year (Figure
27.17). However, these individual events, dramatic as they are, are too rare to account for the huge masses of
the central black holes.
Figure 27.17 A Black Hole Snacks on a Star. This artist’s impression shows three stages of a star (red) swinging too close to a giant
black hole (black circle). The star starts off (top left) in its normal spherical shape, then begins to be pulled into a long football shape
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
by tides raised by the black hole (center). When the star gets closer still, the tides become stronger than the gravity holding the star
together, and it breaks up into a streamer (right). Much of the star’s matter forms a temporary accretion disk that lights up as a
quasar for a few weeks or months. (credit: modification of work by NASA/CXC/M. Weiss)
Another source of fuel for the black hole is the collision of its host galaxy with another galaxy. Some of the
brightest galaxies turn out, when a detailed picture is taken, to be pairs of colliding galaxies. And most of them
have quasars inside them, not easily visible to us because they are buried by enormous amounts of dust and
gas.
A collision between two cars creates quite a mess, pushing parts out of their regular place. In the same way, if
two galaxies collide and merge, then gas and dust (though not so much the stars) can get pushed out of their
regular orbits. Some may veer close enough to the black hole in one galaxy or the other to be devoured by it
and so provide the necessary fuel to power a quasar. As we saw, galaxy collisions and mergers happened most
frequently when the universe was young and probably help account for the fact that quasars were most
common when the universe was only about 20% of its current age.
Collisions in today’s universe are less frequent, but they do happen. Once a galaxy reaches the size of the
Milky Way, most of the galaxies it merges with will be much smaller galaxies—dwarf galaxies (see the chapter
on Galaxies). These don’t disrupt the big galaxy much, but they can supply some additional gas to its black
hole.
By the way, if two galaxies, each of which contains a black hole, collide, then the two black holes may merge
and form an even larger black hole (Figure 27.18). In this process they will emit a burst of gravitational waves.
One of the main goals of the European Space Agency’s planned LISA (Laser Interferometer Space Antenna)
mission is to detect the gravitational wave signals from the merging of supermassive black holes.
Figure 27.18 Colliding Galaxies with Two Black Holes. We compare Hubble Space Telescope visible-light (left) and Chandra X-ray
(right) images of the central regions of NGC 6240, a galaxy about 400 million light-years away. It is a prime example of a galaxy in
which stars are forming, evolving, and exploding at an exceptionally rapid rate due to a relatively recent merger (30 million years
ago). The Chandra image shows two bright X-ray sources, each produced by hot gas surrounding a black hole. Over the course of
the next few hundred million years, the two supermassive black holes, which are about 3000 light-years apart, will drift toward each
other and merge to form an even larger black hole. This detection of a binary black hole supports the idea that black holes can grow
to enormous masses in the centers of galaxies by merging with nearby galaxies. (credit left: modification of work by NASA/CXC/MPE/
S.Komossa et al; credit right: NASA/STScI/R. P. van der Marel, J. Gerssen)
Watch two galaxies collide (https://openstax.org/l/30galcolsuperma) to form a supermassive black hole.
LINK TO LEARNING
27.3 • Quasars as Probes of Evolution in the Universe
How Does the Black Hole Influence the Formation of Stars in the Galaxy?
We have seen that the material in galaxies can influence the growth of the black hole. The black hole in turn
can also influence the galaxy in which it resides. It can do so in three ways: through its jets, through winds of
particles that manage to stream away from the accretion disk, and through radiation from the accretion disk.
As they stream away from the black hole, all three can either promote star formation by compressing the
surrounding gas and dust—or instead suppress star formation by heating the surrounding gas and shredding
molecular clouds, thereby inhibiting or preventing star formation. The outflowing energy can even be enough
to halt the accretion of new material and starve the black hole of fuel. Astronomers are still trying to evaluate
the relative importance of these effects in determining the overall evolution of galactic bulges and the rates of
star formation.
In summary, we have seen how galaxies and supermassive black holes can each influence the evolution of the
other: the galaxy supplies fuel to the black hole, and the quasar can either support or suppress star formation.
The balance of these processes probably helps account for the correlation between black hole and bulge
masses, but there are as yet no theories that explain quantitatively and in detail why the correlation between
black hole and bulge masses is as tight as it is or why the black hole mass is always about 1/200 times the
mass of the bulge.
The Birth of Black Holes and Galaxies
While the connection between quasars and galaxies is increasingly clear, the biggest puzzle of all—namely,
how the supermassive black holes in galaxies got started—remains unsolved. Observations show that they
existed when the universe was very young. One dramatic example is the discovery of a quasar that was
already shining when the universe was only 700 million years old. What does it take to create a large black hole
so quickly? A related problem is that in order to eventually build black holes containing more than 2 billion
solar masses, it is necessary to have giant “seed” black holes with masses at least 2000 times the mass of the
Sun—and they must somehow have been created shortly after the expansion of the universe began.
Astronomers are now working actively to develop models for how these seed black holes might have formed.
Theories suggest that galaxies formed from collapsing clouds of dark matter and gas. Some of the gas formed
stars, but perhaps some of the gas settled to the center where it became so concentrated that it formed a
black hole. If this happened, the black hole could form right away—although this requires that the gas should
not be rotating very much initially.
A more likely scenario is that the gas will have some angular momentum (rotation) that will prevent direct
collapse to a black hole. In that case, the very first generation of stars will form, and some of them, according
to calculations, will have masses hundreds of times that of the Sun. When these stars finish burning hydrogen,
just a few million years later, the supernovae they end with will create black holes a hundred or so times the
mass of the Sun. These can then merge with others or accrete the rich gas supply available at these early
times.
The challenge is growing these smaller black holes quickly enough to make the much larger black holes we
see a few hundred million years later. It turns out to be difficult because there are limits on how fast they can
accrete matter. These should make sense to you from what we discussed earlier in the chapter. If the rate of
accretion becomes too high, then the energy streaming outward from the black hole’s accretion disk will
become so strong as to blow away the infalling matter.
What if, instead, a collapsing gas cloud doesn’t form a black hole directly or break up and form a group of
regular stars, but stays together and makes one fairly massive star embedded within a dense cluster of
thousands of lower mass stars and large quantities of dense gas? The massive star will have a short lifetime
and will soon collapse to become a black hole. It can then begin to attract the dense gas surrounding it. But
calculations show that the gravitational attraction of the many nearby stars will cause the black hole to zigzag
randomly within the cluster and will prevent the formation of an accretion disk. If there is no accretion disk,
27 • Active Galaxies, Quasars, and Supermassive Black Holes
then matter can fall freely into the black hole from all directions. Calculations suggest that under these
conditions, a black hole even as small as 10 times the mass of the Sun could grow to more than 10 billion times
the mass of the Sun by the time the universe is a billion years old.
Scientists are exploring other ideas for how to form the seeds of supermassive black holes, and this remains a
very active field of research. Whatever mechanism caused the rapid formation of these supermassive black
holes, they do give us a way to observe the youthful universe when it was only about five percent as old as it is
now.
Take a look at some new results (https://openstax.org/l/30chanxrayobser) from the Chandra X-ray
Observatory about the formation of supermassive black holes in the early universe.
LINK TO LEARNING
27.3 • Quasars as Probes of Evolution in the Universe
Key Terms
active galactic nuclei (AGN)
galaxies that are almost as luminous as quasars and share many of their
properties, although to a less spectacular degree; abnormal amounts of energy are produced in their
centers
active galaxies
galaxies that house active galactic nuclei
quasar
an object of very high redshift that looks like a star but is extragalactic and highly luminous; also
called a quasi-stellar object, or QSO
Summary
27.1 Quasars
The first quasars discovered looked like stars but had strong radio emission. Their visible-light spectra at first
seemed confusing, but then astronomers realized that they had much larger redshifts than stars. The quasar
spectra obtained so far show redshifts ranging from 15% to more than 96% the speed of light. Observations
with the Hubble Space Telescope show that quasars lie at the centers of galaxies and that both spirals and
ellipticals can harbor quasars. The redshifts of the underlying galaxies match the redshifts of the quasars
embedded in their centers, thereby proving that quasars obey the Hubble law and are at the great distances
implied by their redshifts. To be noticeable at such great distances, quasars must have 10 to 100 times the
luminosity of the brighter normal galaxies. Their variations show that this tremendous energy output is
generated in a small volume—in some cases, in a region not much larger than our own solar system. A
number of galaxies closer to us also show strong activity at their centers—activity now known to be caused by
the same mechanism as the quasars.
27.2 Supermassive Black Holes: What Quasars Really Are
Both active galactic nuclei and quasars derive their energy from material falling toward, and forming a hot
accretion disk around, a massive black hole. This model can account for the large amount of energy emitted
and for the fact that the energy is produced in a relatively small volume of space. It can also explain why jets
coming from these objects are seen in two directions: those directions are perpendicular to the accretion disk.
27.3 Quasars as Probes of Evolution in the Universe
Quasars and galaxies affect each other: the galaxy supplies fuel to the black hole, and the quasar heats and
disrupts the gas clouds in the galaxy. The balance between these two processes probably helps explain why
the black hole seems always to be about 1/200 the mass of the spherical bulge of stars that surrounds the
black hole.
Quasars were much more common billions of years ago than they are now, and astronomers speculate that
they mark an early stage in the formation of galaxies. Quasars were more likely to be active when the universe
was young and fuel for their accretion disk was more available.
Quasar activity can be re-triggered by a collision between two galaxies, which provides a new source of fuel to
feed the black hole.
For Further Exploration
Articles
Bartusiak, M. “A Beast in the Core.” Astronomy (July 1998): 42. On supermassive black holes at the centers of
galaxies.
Disney, M. “A New Look at Quasars.” Scientific American (June 1998): 52.
Djorgovski, S. “Fires at Cosmic Dawn.” Astronomy (September 1995): 36. On quasars and what we can learn
27 • Key Terms
from them.
Ford, H., & Tsvetanov, Z. “Massive Black Holes at the Hearts of Galaxies.” Sky & Telescope (June 1996): 28. Nice
overview.
Irion, R. “A Quasar in Every Galaxy?” Sky & Telescope (July 2006): 40. Discusses how supermassive black holes
powering the centers of galaxies may be more common than thought.
Kormendy, J. “Why Are There so Many Black Holes?” Astronomy (August 2016): 26. Discussion of why
supermassive black holes are so common in the universe.
Kruesi, L. “Secrets of the Brightest Objects in the Universe.” Astronomy (July 2013): 24. Review of our current
understanding of quasars and how they help us learn about black holes.
Miller, M., et al. “Supermassive Black Holes: Shaping their Surroundings.” Sky & Telescope (April 2005): 42. Jets
from black hole disks.
Nadis, S. “Exploring the Galaxy–Black Hole Connection.” Astronomy (May 2010): 28. Overview.
Nadis, S. “Here, There, and Everywhere.” Astronomy (February 2001): 34. On Hubble observations showing
how common supermassive black holes are in galaxies.
Nadis, S. “Peering inside a Monster Galaxy.” Astronomy (May 2014): 24. What X-ray observations tell us about
the mechanism that powers the active galaxy M87.
Olson, S. “Black Hole Hunters.” Astronomy (May 1999): 48. Profiles four astronomers who search for “hungry”
black holes at the centers of active galaxies.
Peterson, B. “Solving the Quasar Puzzle.” Sky & Telescope (September 2013): 24. A review article on how we
figured out that black holes were the power source for quasars, and how we view them today.
Tucker, W., et al. “Black Hole Blowback.” Scientific American (March 2007): 42. How supermassive black holes
create giant bubbles in the intergalactic medium.
Voit, G. “The Rise and Fall of Quasars.” Sky & Telescope (May 1999): 40. Good overview of how quasars fit into
cosmic history.
Wanjek, C. “How Black Holes Helped Build the Universe.” Sky & Telescope (January 2007): 42. On the energy
and outflow from disks around supermassive black holes; nice introduction.
Websites
Monsters in Galactic Nuclei: https://chandra.as.utexas.edu/stardate.html (https://chandra.as.utexas.edu/
stardate.html). An article on supermassive black holes by John Kormendy, from StarDate magazine.
Quasar Astronomy Forty Years On: https://www.astr.ua.edu/keel/agn/quasar40.html
(https://www.astr.ua.edu/keel/agn/quasar40.html). A 2003 popular article by William Keel.
Quasars and Active Galactic Nuclei: https://www.astr.ua.edu/keel/agn/ (https://www.astr.ua.edu/keel/agn/).
An annotated gallery of images showing the wide range of activity in galaxies. There is also an introduction, a
glossary, and background information. Also by William Keel.
Quasars: “The Light Fantastic”: https://hubblesite.org/newscenter/archive/releases/1996/35/background/
(https://hubblesite.org/newscenter/archive/releases/1996/35/background/). This brief “backgrounder” from
the public information office at the HubbleSite gives a bit of the history of the discovery and understanding of
quasars.
Videos
Active Galaxies: https://vimeo.com/21079798 (https://vimeo.com/21079798). Part of the Astronomy:
27 • For Further Exploration
Observations and Theories series; half-hour introduction to quasars and related objects (27:28).
Black Hole Chaos: The Environments of the Most Supermassive Black Holes in the Universe:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzSgU-3d8QY (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzSgU-3d8QY). May
2013 lecture by Dr. Belinda Wilkes and Dr. Francesca Civano of the Center for Astrophysics in the CfA
Observatory Nights Lecture Series (50:14).
Hubble and Black Holes: https://www.spacetelescope.org/videos/hubblecast43a/
(https://www.spacetelescope.org/videos/hubblecast43a/). Hubblecast on black holes and active galactic nuclei
(9:10).
Monster Black Holes: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LN9oYjNKBm8 (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=LN9oYjNKBm8). May 2013 lecture by Professor Chung-Pei Ma of the University of California, Berkeley;
part of the Silicon Valley Astronomy Lecture Series (1:18:03).
Image of a Black Hole: https://www.eso.org/public/videos/eso1907a/ (https://www.eso.org/public/videos/
eso1907a/). Video about the Event Horizon Telescope and its pioneering image of the shadow of the event
horizon in the active galaxy M87.
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
When quasars were first discovered and the source of their great energy was unknown, some
astronomers searched for evidence that quasars are much nearer to us than their redshifts imply. (That
way, they would not have to produce so much energy to look as bright as they do.) One way was to find a
“mismatched pair”—a quasar and a galaxy with different redshifts that lie in very nearly the same
direction in the sky. Suppose you do find one and only one galaxy with a quasar very close by, and the
redshift of the quasar is six times larger than that of the galaxy. Have your group discuss whether you
could then conclude that the two objects are at the same distance and that redshift is not a reliable
indicator of distance. Why? Suppose you found three such pairs, each with different mismatched
redshifts? Suppose every galaxy has a nearby quasar with a different redshift. How would your answer
change and why?
B.
Large ground-based telescopes typically can grant time to only one out of every four astronomers who
apply for observing time. One prominent astronomer tried for several years to establish that the redshifts
of quasars do not indicate their distances. At first, he was given time on the world’s largest telescope, but
eventually it became clearer that quasars were just the centers of active galaxies and that their redshifts
really did indicate distance. At that point, he was denied observing time by the committee of astronomers
who reviewed such proposals. Suppose your group had been the committee. What decision would you
have made? Why? (In general, what criteria should astronomers have for allowing astronomers whose
views completely disagree with the prevailing opinion to be able to pursue their research?)
C.
Based on the information in this chapter and in Black Holes and Curved Spacetime, have your group
discuss what it would be like near the event horizon of a supermassive black hole in a quasar or active
galaxy. Make a list of all the reasons a trip to that region would not be good for your health. Be specific.
D.
Before we understood that the energy of quasars comes from supermassive black holes, astronomers
were baffled by how such small regions could give off so much energy. A variety of models were
suggested, some involving new physics or pretty “far out” ideas from current physics. Can your group
come up with some areas of astronomy that you have studied in this course where we don’t yet have an
explanation for something happening in the cosmos?
27 • Collaborative Group Activities
Exercises
Review Questions
1. Describe some differences between quasars and normal galaxies.
2. Describe the arguments supporting the idea that quasars are at the distances indicated by their redshifts.
3. In what ways are active galaxies like quasars but different from normal galaxies?
4. Why could the concentration of matter at the center of an active galaxy like M87 not be made of stars?
5. Describe the process by which the action of a black hole can explain the energy radiated by quasars.
6. Describe the observations that convinced astronomers that M87 is an active galaxy.
7. Why do astronomers believe that quasars represent an early stage in the evolution of galaxies?
8. Why were quasars and active galaxies not initially recognized as being “special” in some way?
9. What do we now understand to be the primary difference between normal galaxies and active galaxies?
10. What is the typical structure we observe in a quasar at radio frequencies?
11. What evidence do we have that the luminous central region of a quasar is small and compact?
Thought Questions
12. Suppose you observe a star-like object in the sky. How can you determine whether it is actually a star or a
quasar?
13. Why don’t any of the methods for establishing distances to galaxies, described in Galaxies (other than
Hubble’s law itself), work for quasars?
14. One of the early hypotheses to explain the high redshifts of quasars was that these objects had been
ejected at very high speeds from other galaxies. This idea was rejected, because no quasars with large
blueshifts have been found. Explain why we would expect to see quasars with both blueshifted and
redshifted lines if they were ejected from nearby galaxies.
15. A friend of yours who has watched many Star Trek episodes and movies says, “I thought that black holes
pulled everything into them. Why then do astronomers think that black holes can explain the great
outpouring of energy from quasars?” How would you respond?
16. Could the Milky Way ever become an active galaxy? Is it likely to ever be as luminous as a quasar?
17. Why are quasars generally so much more luminous (why do they put out so much more energy) than
active galaxies?
18. Suppose we detect a powerful radio source with a radio telescope. How could we determine whether or
not this was a newly discovered quasar and not some nearby radio transmission?
19. A friend tries to convince you that she can easily see a quasar in her backyard telescope. Would you
believe her claim?
Figuring for Yourself
20. Show that no matter how big a redshift (z) we measure, v/c will never be greater than 1. (In other words,
no galaxy we observe can be moving away faster than the speed of light.)
21. If a quasar has a redshift of 3.3, at what fraction of the speed of light is it moving away from us?
22. If a quasar is moving away from us at v/c = 0.8, what is the measured redshift?
27 • Exercises
23. In the chapter, we discussed that the largest redshifts found so far are greater than 6. Suppose we find a
quasar with a redshift of 6.1. With what fraction of the speed of light is it moving away from us?
24. Rapid variability in quasars indicates that the region in which the energy is generated must be small. You
can show why this is true. Suppose, for example, that the region in which the energy is generated is a
transparent sphere 1 light-year in diameter. Suppose that in 1 s this region brightens by a factor of 10 and
remains bright for two years, after which it returns to its original luminosity. Draw its light curve (a graph
of its brightness over time) as viewed from Earth.
25. Large redshifts move the positions of spectral lines to longer wavelengths and change what can be
observed from the ground. For example, suppose a quasar has a redshift of
At what
wavelength would you make observations in order to detect its Lyman line of hydrogen, which has a
laboratory or rest wavelength of 121.6 nm? Would this line be observable with a ground-based telescope
in a quasar with zero redshift? Would it be observable from the ground in a quasar with a redshift of
26. Once again in this chapter, we see the use of Kepler’s third law to estimate the mass of supermassive
black holes. In the case of NGC 4261, this chapter supplied the result of the calculation of the mass of the
black hole in NGC 4261. In order to get this answer, astronomers had to measure the velocity of particles
in the ring of dust and gas that surrounds the black hole. How high were these velocities? Turn Kepler’s
third law around and use the information given in this chapter about the galaxy NGC 4261—the mass of
the black hole at its center and the diameter of the surrounding ring of dust and gas—to calculate how
long it would take a dust particle in the ring to complete a single orbit around the black hole. Assume that
the only force acting on the dust particle is the gravitational force exerted by the black hole. Calculate the
velocity of the dust particle in km/s.
27. In the Check Your Learning section of Example 27.1, you were told that several lines of hydrogen
absorption in the visible spectrum have rest wavelengths of 410 nm, 434 nm, 486 nm, and 656 nm. In a
spectrum of a distant galaxy, these same lines are observed to have wavelengths of 492 nm, 521 nm, 583
nm, and 787 nm, respectively. The example demonstrated that z = 0.20 for the 410 nm line. Show that you
will obtain the same redshift regardless of which absorption line you measure.
28. In the Check Your Learning section of Example 27.1, the author commented that even at z = 0.2, there is
already an 11% deviation between the relativistic and the classical solution. What is the percentage
difference between the classical and relativistic results at z = 0.1? What is it for z = 0.5? What is it for z = 1?
29. The quasar that appears the brightest in our sky, 3C 273, is located at a distance of 2.4 billion light-years.
The Sun would have to be viewed from a distance of 1300 light-years to have the same apparent
magnitude as 3C 273. Using the inverse square law for light, estimate the luminosity of 3C 273 in solar
units.
27 • Exercises
