Figure 29.1 Space Telescope of the Future. This drawing shows the James Webb Space Telescope, which is currently planned
for launch in 2021. The silver sunshade shadows the primary mirror and science instruments. The primary mirror is 6.5 meters (21
feet) in diameter. Before and during launch, the mirror will be folded up. After the telescope is placed in its orbit, ground controllers
will command it to unfold the mirror petals. To see distant galaxies whose light has been shifted to long wavelengths, the telescope
will carry several instruments for taking infrared images and spectra. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Chapter Outline
29.1 The Age of the Universe
29.2 A Model of the Universe
29.3 The Beginning of the Universe
29.4 The Cosmic Microwave Background
29.5 What Is the Universe Really Made Of?
29.6 The Inflationary Universe
29.7 The Anthropic Principle
Thinking Ahead
In previous chapters, we explored the contents of the universe—planets, stars, and galaxies—and learned
about how these objects change with time. But what about the universe as a whole? How old is it? What did it
look like in the beginning? How has it changed since then? What will be its fate?
Cosmology is the study of the universe as a whole and is the subject of this chapter. The story of observational
cosmology really begins in 1929 when Edwin Hubble published observations of redshifts and distances for a
small sample of galaxies and showed the then-revolutionary result that we live in an expanding universe—one
which in the past was denser, hotter, and smoother. From this early discovery, astronomers developed many
predictions about the origin and evolution of the universe and then tested those predictions with
observations. In this chapter, we will describe what we already know about the history of our dynamic universe
and highlight some of the mysteries that remain.
The Big Bang
29 • Thinking Ahead
29.1
The Age of the Universe
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how we estimate the age of the universe
Explain how changes in the rate of expansion over time affect estimates of the age of the universe
Describe the evidence that dark energy exists and that the rate of expansion is currently accelerating
Describe some independent evidence for the age of the universe that is consistent with the age estimate
based on the rate of expansion
To explore the history of the universe, we will follow the same path that astronomers followed
historically—beginning with studies of the nearby universe and then probing ever-more-distant objects and
looking further back in time.
The realization that the universe changes with time came in the 1920s and 1930s when measurements of the
redshifts of a large sample of galaxies became available. With hindsight, it is surprising that scientists were so
shocked to discover that the universe is expanding. In fact, our theories of gravity demand that the universe
must be either expanding or contracting. To show what we mean, let’s begin with a universe of finite size—say
a giant ball of a thousand galaxies. All these galaxies attract each other because of their gravity. If they were
initially stationary, they would inevitably begin to move closer together and eventually collide. They could
avoid this collapse only if for some reason they happened to be moving away from each other at high speeds.
In just the same way, only if a rocket is launched at high enough speed can it avoid falling back to Earth.
The problem of what happens in an infinite universe is harder to solve, but Einstein (and others) used his
theory of general relativity (which we described in Black Holes and Curved Spacetime) to show that even
infinite universes cannot be static. Since astronomers at that time did not yet know the universe was
expanding (and Einstein himself was philosophically unwilling to accept a universe in motion), he changed his
equations by introducing an arbitrary new term (we might call it a fudge factor) called the cosmological
constant. This constant represented a hypothetical force of repulsion that could balance gravitational
attraction on the largest scales and permit galaxies to remain at fixed distances from one another. That way,
the universe could remain still.
Figure 29.2 Einstein and Hubble. (a) Albert Einstein is shown in a 1921 photograph. (b) Edwin Hubble at work in the Mt. Wilson
Observatory.
29 • The Big Bang
About a decade later, Hubble, and his coworkers reported that the universe is expanding, so that no
mysterious balancing force is needed. (We discussed this in the chapter on Galaxies.) Einstein is reported to
have said that the introduction of the cosmological constant was “the biggest blunder of my life.” As we shall
see later in this chapter, however, relatively recent observations indicate that the expansion is accelerating.
Observations are now being carried out to determine whether this acceleration is consistent with a
cosmological constant. In a way, it may turn out that Einstein was right after all.
View this web exhibit (https://openstax.org/l/30exhcosmAIPCHP) on the history of our thinking about
cosmology, with images and biographies, from the American Institute of Physics Center for the History of
Physics.
The Hubble Time
If we had a movie of the expanding universe and ran the film backward, what would we see? The galaxies,
instead of moving apart, would move together in our movie—getting closer and closer all the time. Eventually,
we would find that all the matter we can see today was once concentrated in an infinitesimally small volume.
Astronomers identify this time with the beginning of the universe. The explosion of that concentrated universe
at the beginning of time is called the Big Bang (not a bad term, since you can’t have a bigger bang than one
that creates the entire universe). But when did this bang occur?
We can make a reasonable estimate of the time since the universal expansion began. To see how astronomers
do this, let’s begin with an analogy. Suppose your astronomy class decides to have a party (a kind of “Big
Bang”) at someone’s home to celebrate the end of the semester. Unfortunately, everyone is celebrating with
so much enthusiasm that the neighbors call the police, who arrive and send everyone away at the same
moment. You get home at 2 a.m., still somewhat upset about the way the party ended, and realize you forgot
to look at your watch to see what time the police got there. But you use a map to measure that the distance
between the party and your house is 40 kilometers. And you also remember that you drove the whole trip at a
steady speed of 80 kilometers/hour (since you were worried about the police cars following you). Therefore,
the trip must have taken:
So the party must have broken up at 1:30 a.m.
No humans were around to look at their watches when the universe began, but we can use the same
technique to estimate when the galaxies began moving away from each other. (Remember that, in reality, it is
space that is expanding, not the galaxies that are moving through static space.) If we can measure how far
apart the galaxies are now, and how fast they are moving, we can figure out how long a trip it’s been.
Let’s call the age of the universe measured in this way T0. Let’s first do a simple case by assuming that the
expansion has been at a constant rate ever since the expansion of the universe began. In this case, the time it
has taken a galaxy to move a distance, d, away from the Milky Way (remember that at the beginning the
galaxies were all together in a very tiny volume) is (as in our example)
where v is the velocity of the galaxy. If we can measure the speed with which galaxies are moving away, and
also the distances between them, we can establish how long ago the expansion began.
Making such measurements should sound very familiar. This is just what Hubble and many astronomers after
LINK TO LEARNING
29.1 • The Age of the Universe
him needed to do in order to establish the Hubble law and the Hubble constant. We learned in Galaxies that a
galaxy’s distance and its velocity in the expanding universe are related by
where H is the Hubble constant. Combining these two expressions gives us
We see, then, that the work of calculating this time was already done for us when astronomers measured the
Hubble constant. The age of the universe estimated in this way turns out to be just the reciprocal of the
Hubble constant (that is, 1/H). This age estimate is sometimes called the Hubble time. For a Hubble constant
of 20 kilometers/second per million light-years, the Hubble time is about 15 billion years. (By the way, the unit
used by astronomers for the Hubble constant is kilometers/second per million parsecs. In these units, the
Hubble constant is equal to about 70 kilometers/second per million parsecs, again with an uncertainty of
about 5%.)
To make numbers easier to remember, we have done some rounding here. Estimates for the Hubble constant
are actually closer to 21 or 22 kilometers/second per million light-years, which would make the age closer to 14
billion years. But there is still about a 5% uncertainty in the Hubble constant, which means the age of the
universe estimated in this way is also uncertain by about 5%.
To put these uncertainties in perspective, however, you should know that 50 years ago, the uncertainty was a
factor of 2. Remarkable progress toward pinning down the Hubble constant has been made in the last couple
of decades.
The Role of Deceleration
The Hubble time is the right age for the universe only if the expansion rate has been constant throughout the
time since the expansion of the universe began. Continuing with our end-of-the-semester-party analogy, this
is equivalent to assuming that you traveled home from the party at a constant rate, when in fact this may not
have been the case. At first, mad about having to leave, you may have driven fast, but then as you calmed
down—and thought about police cars on the highway—you may have begun to slow down until you were
driving at a more socially acceptable speed (such as 80 kilometers/hour). In this case, given that you were
driving faster at the beginning, the trip home would have taken less than a half-hour.
In the same way, in calculating the Hubble time, we have assumed that the expansion rate has been constant
throughout all of time. It turns out that this is not a good assumption. Earlier in their thinking about this,
astronomers expected that the rate of expansion should be slowing down. We know that matter creates
gravity, whereby all objects pull on all other objects. The mutual attraction between galaxies was expected to
slow the expansion as time passed. This means that, if gravity were the only force acting (a big if, as we shall
see in the next section), then the rate of expansion must have been faster in the past than it is today. In this
case, we would say the universe has been decelerating since the beginning.
How much it has decelerated depends on the importance of gravity in slowing the expansion. If the universe
were nearly empty, the role of gravity would be minor. Then the deceleration would be close to zero, and the
universe would have been expanding at a constant rate. But in a universe with any significant density of
matter, the pull of gravity means that the rate of expansion should be slower now than it used to be. If we use
the current rate of expansion to estimate how long it took the galaxies to reach their current separations, we
will overestimate the age of the universe—just as we may have overestimated the time it took for you to get
home from the party.
A Universal Acceleration
Astronomers spent several decades looking for evidence that the expansion was decelerating, but they were
not successful. What they needed were 1) larger telescopes so that they could measure the redshifts of more
29 • The Big Bang
distant galaxies and 2) a very luminous standard bulb (or standard candle), that is, some astronomical object
with known luminosity that produces an enormous amount of energy and can be observed at distances of a
billion light-years or more.
Recall that we discussed standard bulbs in the chapter on Galaxies. If we compare how luminous a standard
bulb is supposed to be and how dim it actually looks in our telescopes, the difference allows us to calculate its
distance. The redshift of the galaxy such a bulb is in can tell us how fast it is moving in the universe. So we can
measure its distance and motion independently.
These two requirements were finally met in the 1990s. Astronomers showed that supernovae of type Ia (see
The Death of Stars), with some corrections based on the shapes of their light curves, are standard bulbs. This
type of supernova occurs when a white dwarf accretes enough material from a companion star to exceed the
Chandrasekhar limit and then collapses and explodes. At the time of maximum brightness, these dramatic
supernovae can briefly outshine the galaxies that host them, and hence, they can be observed at very large
distances. Large 8- to 10-meter telescopes can be used to obtain the spectra needed to measure the redshifts
of the host galaxies (Figure 29.3).
Figure 29.3 Five Supernovae and Their Host Galaxies. The top row shows each galaxy and its supernova (arrow). The bottom row
shows the same galaxies either before or after the supernovae exploded. (credit: modification of work by NASA, ESA, and A. Riess
(STScI))
The result of painstaking, careful study of these supernovae in a range of galaxies, carried out by two groups
of researchers, was published in 1998. It was shocking—and so revolutionary that their discovery received the
2011 Nobel Prize in Physics. What the researchers found was that these type Ia supernovae in distant galaxies
were fainter than expected from Hubble’s law, given the measured redshifts of their host galaxies. In other
words, distances estimated from the supernovae used as standard bulbs disagreed with the distances
measured from the redshifts.
If the universe were decelerating, we would expect the far-away supernovae to be brighter than expected. The
slowing down would have kept them closer to us. Instead, they were fainter, which at first seemed to make no
sense.
Before accepting this shocking development, astronomers first explored the possibility that the supernovae
might not really be as useful as standard bulbs as they thought. Perhaps the supernovae appeared too faint
because dust along our line of sight to them absorbed some of their light. Or perhaps the supernovae at large
distances were for some reason intrinsically less luminous than nearby supernovae of type Ia.
A host of more detailed observations ruled out these possibilities. Scientists then had to consider the
alternative that the distance estimated from the redshift was incorrect. Distances derived from redshifts
29.1 • The Age of the Universe
assume that the Hubble constant has been truly constant for all time. We saw that one way it might not be
constant is that the expansion is slowing down. But suppose neither assumption is right (steady speed or
slowing down.)
Suppose, instead, that the universe is accelerating. If the universe is expanding faster now than it was billions
of years ago, our motion away from the distant supernovae has sped up since the explosion occurred,
sweeping us farther away from them. The light of the explosion has to travel a greater distance to reach us
than if the expansion rate were constant. The farther the light travels, the fainter it appears. This conclusion
would explain the supernova observations in a natural way, and this has now been substantiated by many
additional observations over the last couple of decades. It really seems that the expansion of the universe is
accelerating, a notion so unexpected that astronomers at first resisted considering it.
How can the expansion of the universe be speeding up? If you want to accelerate your car, you must supply
energy by stepping on the gas. Similarly, energy must be supplied to accelerate the expansion of the universe.
The discovery of the acceleration was shocking because scientists still have no idea what the source of the
energy is. Scientists call whatever it is dark energy, which is a clear sign of how little we understand it.
Note that this new component of the universe is not the dark matter we talked about in earlier chapters. Dark
energy is something else that we have also not yet detected in our laboratories on Earth.
What is dark energy? One possibility is that it is the cosmological constant, which is an energy associated with
the vacuum of “empty” space itself. Quantum mechanics (the intriguing theory of how things behave at the
atomic and subatomic levels) tells us that the source of this vacuum energy might be tiny elementary particles
that flicker in and out of existence everywhere throughout the universe. Various attempts have been made to
calculate how big the effects of this vacuum energy should be, but so far these attempts have been
unsuccessful. In fact, the order of magnitude of theoretical estimates of the vacuum energy based on the
quantum mechanics of matter and the value required to account for the acceleration of the expansion of the
universe differ by an incredible factor of at least 10120 (that is a 1 followed by 120 zeros)! Various other theories
have been suggested, but the bottom line is that, although there is compelling evidence that dark energy
exists, we do not yet know the source of that energy.
Whatever the dark energy turns out to be, we should note that the discovery that the rate of expansion has
not been constant since the beginning of the universe complicates the calculation of the age of the universe.
Interestingly, the acceleration seems not to have started with the Big Bang. During the first several billion
years after the Big Bang, when galaxies were close together, gravity was strong enough to slow the expansion.
As galaxies moved farther apart, the effect of gravity weakened. Several billion years after the Big Bang, dark
energy took over, and the expansion began to accelerate (Figure 29.4).
29 • The Big Bang
Figure 29.4 Changes in the Rate of Expansion of the Universe Since Its Beginning 13.8 Billion Years Ago. The more the diagram
spreads out horizontally, the faster the change in the velocity of expansion. After a period of very rapid expansion at the beginning,
which scientists call inflation and which we will discuss later in this chapter, the expansion began to decelerate. Galaxies were then
close together, and their mutual gravitational attraction slowed the expansion. After a few billion years, when galaxies were farther
apart, the influence of gravity began to weaken. Dark energy then took over and caused the expansion to accelerate. (credit:
modification of work by Ann Feild (STScI))
Deceleration works to make the age of the universe estimated by the simple relation T0 = 1/H seem older than
it really is, whereas acceleration works to make it seem younger. By happy coincidence, our best estimates of
how much deceleration and acceleration occurred lead to an answer for the age very close to T0 = 1/H . The
best current estimate is that the universe is 13.8 billion years old with an uncertainty of only about 100 million
years.
Throughout this chapter, we have referred to the Hubble constant. We now know that the Hubble constant
does change with time. It is, however, constant everywhere in the universe at any given time. When we say the
Hubble constant is about 70 kilometers/second/million parsecs, we mean that this is the value of the Hubble
constant at the current time.
Comparing Ages
We now have one estimate for the age of the universe from its expansion. Is this estimate consistent with
other observations? For example, are the oldest stars or other astronomical objects younger than 13.8 billion
years? After all, the universe has to be at least as old as the oldest objects in it.
In our Galaxy and others, the oldest stars are found in the globular clusters (Figure 29.5), which can be dated
using the models of stellar evolution described in the chapter Stars from Adolescence to Old Age.
29.1 • The Age of the Universe
Figure 29.5 Globular Cluster 47 Tucanae. This NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope image shows a globular cluster known as 47
Tucanae, since it is in the constellation of Tucana (The Toucan) in the southern sky. The second-brightest globular cluster in the night
sky, it includes hundreds of thousands of stars. Globular clusters are among the oldest objects in our Galaxy and can be used to
estimate its age. (credit: NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage (STScI/AURA)-ESA/Hubble Collaboration)
The accuracy of the age estimates of the globular clusters has improved markedly in recent years for two
reasons. First, models of interiors of globular cluster stars have been improved, mainly through better
information about how atoms absorb radiation as they make their way from the center of a star out into
space. Second, observations from satellites have improved the accuracy of our measurements of the distances
to these clusters. The conclusion is that the oldest stars formed about 12–13 billion years ago.
This age estimate has recently been confirmed by the study of the spectrum of uranium in the stars. The
isotope uranium-238 is radioactive and decays (changes into another element) over time. (Uranium-238 gets
its designation because it has 92 protons and 146 neutrons.) We know (from how stars and supernovae make
elements) how much uranium-238 is generally made compared to other elements. Suppose we measure the
amount of uranium relative to nonradioactive elements in a very old star and in our own Sun, and compare the
abundances. With those pieces of information, we can estimate how much longer the uranium has been
decaying in the very old star because we know from our own Sun how much uranium decays in 4.5 billion
years.
The line of uranium is very weak and hard to make out even in the Sun, but it has now been measured in one
extremely old star using the European Very Large Telescope (Figure 29.6). Comparing the abundance with that
in the solar system, whose age we know, astronomers estimate the star is 12.5 billion years old, with an
uncertainty of about 3 billion years. While the uncertainty is large, this work is important confirmation of the
ages estimated by studies of the globular cluster stars. Note that the uranium age estimate is completely
independent; it does not depend on either the measurement of distances or on models of the interiors of
stars.
29 • The Big Bang
Figure 29.6 European Extremely Large Telescope, European Very Large Telescope, and the Colosseum. The European Extremely
Large Telescope (E-ELT) is currently under construction in Chile. This image compares the size of the E-ELT (left) with the four
8-meter telescopes of the European Very Large Telescope (center) and with the Colosseum in Rome (right). The mirror of the E-ELT
will be 39 meters in diameter. Astronomers are building a new generation of giant telescopes in order to observe very distant
galaxies and understand what they were like when they were newly formed and the universe was young. (credit: modification of
work by ESO)
As we shall see later in this chapter, the globular cluster stars probably did not form until the expansion of the
universe had been underway for at least a few hundred million years. Accordingly, their ages are consistent
with the 13.8 billion-year age estimated from the expansion rate.
29.2
A Model of the Universe
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how the rate of expansion of the universe affects its evolution
Describe four possibilities for the evolution of the universe
Explain what is expanding when we say that the universe is expanding
Define critical density and the evidence that matter alone in the universe is much smaller than the critical
density
Describe what the observations say about the likely long-term future of the universe
Let’s now use the results about the expansion of the universe to look at how these ideas might be applied to
develop a model for the evolution of the universe as a whole. With this model, astronomers can make
predictions about how the universe has evolved so far and what will happen to it in the future.
The Expanding Universe
Every model of the universe must include the expansion we observe. Another key element of the models is
that the cosmological principle (which we discussed in The Evolution and Distribution of Galaxies) is valid: on
the large scale, the universe at any given time is the same everywhere (homogeneous and isotropic). As a
result, the expansion rate must be the same everywhere during any epoch of cosmic time. If so, we don’t need
to think about the entire universe when we think about the expansion, we can just look at any sufficiently large
portion of it. (Some models for dark energy would allow the expansion rate to be different in different
directions, and scientists are designing experiments to test this idea. However, until such evidence is found, we
will assume that the cosmological principle applies throughout the universe.)
In Galaxies, we hinted that when we think of the expansion of the universe, it is more correct to think of space
itself stretching rather than of galaxies moving through static space. Nevertheless, we have since been
discussing the redshifts of galaxies as if they resulted from the motion of the galaxies themselves.
29.2 • A Model of the Universe
Now, however, it is time to finally put such simplistic notions behind us and take a more sophisticated look at
the cosmic expansion. Recall from our discussion of Einstein’s theory of general relativity (in the chapter on
Black Holes and Curved Spacetime) that space—or, more precisely, spacetime—is not a mere backdrop to the
action of the universe, as Newton thought. Rather, it is an active participant—affected by and in turn affecting
the matter and energy in the universe.
Since the expansion of the universe is the stretching of all spacetime, all points in the universe are stretching
together. Thus, the expansion began everywhere at once. Unfortunately for tourist agencies of the future,
there is no location you can visit where the stretching of space began or where we can say that the Big Bang
happened.
To describe just how space stretches, we say the cosmic expansion causes the universe to undergo a uniform
change in scale over time. By scale we mean, for example, the distance between two clusters of galaxies. It is
customary to represent the scale by the factor R; if R doubles, then the distance between the clusters has
doubled. Since the universe is expanding at the same rate everywhere, the change in R tells us how much it
has expanded (or contracted) at any given time. For a static universe, R would be constant as time passes. In
an expanding universe, R increases with time.
If it is space that is stretching rather than galaxies moving through space, then why do the galaxies show
redshifts in their spectra? When you were young and naïve—a few chapters ago—it was fine to discuss the
redshifts of distant galaxies as if they resulted from their motion away from us. But now that you are an older
and wiser student of cosmology, this view will simply not do.
A more accurate view of the redshifts of galaxies is that the light waves are stretched by the stretching of the
space they travel through. Think about the light from a remote galaxy. As it moves away from its source, the
light has to travel through space. If space is stretching during all the time the light is traveling, the light waves
will be stretched as well. A redshift is a stretching of waves—the wavelength of each wave increases (Figure
29.7). Light from more distant galaxies travels for more time than light from closer ones. This means that the
light has stretched more than light from closer ones and thus shows a greater redshift.
Figure 29.7 Expansion and Redshift. As an elastic surface expands, a wave on its surface stretches. For light waves, the increase in
wavelength would be seen as a redshift.
Thus, what the measured redshift of light from an object is telling us is how much the universe has expanded
since the light left the object. If the universe has expanded by a factor of 2, then the wavelength of the light
(and all electromagnetic waves from the same source) will have doubled.
Models of the Expansion
Before astronomers knew about dark energy or had a good measurement of how much matter exists in the
universe, they made speculative models about how the universe might evolve over time. The four possible
scenarios are shown in Figure 29.8. In this diagram, time moves forward from the bottom upward, and the
scale of space increases by the horizontal circles becoming wider.
29 • The Big Bang
Figure 29.8 Four Possible Models of the Universe. The yellow square marks the present in all four cases, and for all four, the
Hubble constant is equal to the same value at the present time. Time is measured in the vertical direction. The first two universes on
the left are ones in which the rate of expansion slows over time. The one on the left will eventually slow, come to a stop and reverse,
ending up in a “big crunch,” while the one next to it will continue to expand forever, but ever-more slowly as time passes. The
“coasting” universe is one that expands at a constant rate given by the Hubble constant throughout all of cosmic time. The
accelerating universe on the right will continue to expand faster and faster forever. (credit: modification of work by NASA/ESA)
The simplest scenario of an expanding universe would be one in which R increases with time at a constant
rate. But you already know that life is not so simple. The universe contains a great deal of mass and its gravity
decelerates the expansion—by a large amount if the universe contains a lot of matter, or by a negligible
amount if the universe is nearly empty. Then there is the observed acceleration, which astronomers blame on
a kind of dark energy.
Let’s first explore the range of possibilities with models for different amounts of mass in the universe and for
different contributions by dark energy. In some models—as we shall see—the universe expands forever. In
others, it stops expanding and starts to contract. After looking at the extreme possibilities, we will look at
recent observations that allow us to choose the most likely scenario.
We should perhaps pause for a minute to note how remarkable it is that we can do this at all. Our
understanding of the principles that underlie how the universe works on the large scale and our observations
of how the objects in the universe change with time allow us to model the evolution of the entire cosmos these
days. It is one of the loftiest achievements of the human mind.
What astronomers look at in practice, to determine the kind of universe we live in, is the average density of the
universe. This is the mass of matter (including the equivalent mass of energy)1 that would be contained in
each unit of volume (say, 1 cubic centimeter) if all the stars, galaxies, and other objects were taken apart, atom
by atom, and if all those particles, along with the light and other energy, were distributed throughout all of
space with absolute uniformity. If the average density is low, there is less mass and less gravity, and the
universe will not decelerate very much. It can therefore expand forever. Higher average density, on the other
hand, means there is more mass and more gravity and that the stretching of space might slow down enough
that the expansion will eventually stop. An extremely high density might even cause the universe to collapse
again.
For a given rate of expansion, there is a critical density—the mass per unit volume that will be just enough to
slow the expansion to zero at some time infinitely far in the future. If the actual density is higher than this
critical density, then the expansion will ultimately reverse and the universe will begin to contract. If the actual
density is lower, then the universe will expand forever.
These various possibilities are illustrated in Figure 29.9. In this graph, one of the most comprehensive in all of
By equivalent mass we mean that which would result if the energy were turned into mass using Einstein’s formula, E = mc2.
29.2 • A Model of the Universe
science, we chart the development of the scale of space in the cosmos against the passage of time. Time
increases to the right, and the scale of the universe, R, increases upward in the figure. Today, at the point
marked “present” along the time axis, R is increasing in each model. We know that the galaxies are currently
expanding away from each other, no matter which model is right. (The same situation holds for a baseball
thrown high into the air. While it may eventually fall back down, near the beginning of the throw it moves
upward most rapidly.)
The various lines moving across the graph correspond to different models of the universe. The straight dashed
line corresponds to the empty universe with no deceleration; it intercepts the time axis at a time, T0 (the
Hubble time), in the past. This is not a realistic model but gives us a measure to compare other models to. The
curves below the dashed line represent models with no dark energy and with varying amounts of deceleration,
starting from the Big Bang at shorter times in the past. The curve above the dashed line shows what happens
if the expansion is accelerating. Let’s take a closer look at the future according to the different models.
Figure 29.9 Models of the Universe. This graph plots R, the scale of the universe, against time for various cosmological models.
Curve 1 represents a universe where the density is greater than the critical value; this model predicts that the universe will eventually
collapse. Curve 2 represents a universe with a density lower than critical; the universe will continue to expand but at an ever-slower
rate. Curve 3 is a critical-density universe; in this universe, the expansion will gradually slow to a stop infinitely far in the future.
Curve 4 represents a universe that is accelerating because of the effects of dark energy. The dashed line is for an empty universe,
one in which the expansion is not slowed by gravity or accelerated by dark energy. Time is very compressed on this graph.
Let’s start with curve 1 in Figure 29.9. In this case, the actual density of the universe is higher than the critical
density and there is no dark energy. This universe will stop expanding at some time in the future and begin
contracting. This model is called a closed universe and corresponds to the universe on the left in Figure 29.8.
Eventually, the scale drops to zero, which means that space will have shrunk to an infinitely small size. The
noted physicist John Wheeler called this the “big crunch,” because matter, energy, space, and time would all
be crushed out of existence. Note that the “big crunch” is the opposite of the Big Bang—it is an implosion. The
universe is not expanding but rather collapsing in upon itself.
Some scientists speculated that another Big Bang might follow the crunch, giving rise to a new expansion
phase, and then another contraction—perhaps oscillating between successive Big Bangs and big crunches
indefinitely in the past and future. Such speculation was sometimes referred to as the oscillating theory of the
universe. The challenge for theorists was how to describe the transition from collapse (when space and time
themselves disappear into the big crunch) to expansion. With the discovery of dark energy, however, it does
not appear that the universe will experience a big crunch, so we can put worrying about it on the back burner.
If the density of the universe is less than the critical density (curve 2 in Figure 29.9 and the universe second
from the left in Figure 29.8), gravity is never important enough to stop the expansion, and so the universe
expands forever. Such a universe is infinite and this model is called an open universe. Time and space begin
with the Big Bang, but they have no end; the universe simply continues expanding, always a bit more slowly as
29 • The Big Bang
time goes on. Groups of galaxies eventually get so far apart that it would be difficult for observers in any of
them to see the others. (See the feature box on What Might the Universe Be Like in the Distant Future? for
more about the distant future in the closed and open universe models.)
At the critical density (curve 3), the universe can just barely expand forever. The critical-density universe has an
age of exactly two-thirds T0, where T0 is the age of the empty universe. Universes that will someday begin to
contract have ages less than two-thirds T0.
In an empty universe (the dashed line Figure 29.9 and the coasting universe in Figure 29.8), neither gravity nor
dark energy is important enough to affect the expansion rate, which is therefore constant throughout all time.
In a universe with dark energy, the rate of the expansion will increase with time, and the expansion will
continue at an ever-faster rate. Curve 4 in Figure 29.9, which represents this universe, has a complicated
shape. In the beginning, when the matter is all very close together, the rate of expansion is most influenced by
gravity. Dark energy appears to act only over large scales and thus becomes more important as the universe
grows larger and the matter begins to thin out. In this model, at first the universe slows down, but as space
stretches, the acceleration plays a greater role and the expansion speeds up.
The Cosmic Tug of War
We might summarize our discussion so far by saying that a “tug of war” is going on in the universe between
the forces that push everything apart and the gravitational attraction of matter, which pulls everything
together. If we can determine who will win this tug of war, we will learn the ultimate fate of the universe.
The first thing we need to know is the density of the universe. Is it greater than, less than, or equal to the
critical density? The critical density today depends on the value of the expansion rate today, H0. If the Hubble
constant is around 20 kilometers/second per million light-years, the critical density is about 10–26 kg/m3. Let’s
see how this value compares with the actual density of the universe.
E X A M P L E 2 9 . 1
Critical Density of the Universe
As we discussed, the critical density is that combination of matter and energy that brings the universe
coasting to a stop at time infinity. Einstein’s equations lead to the following expression for the critical
density (ρcrit):
where H is the Hubble constant and G is the universal constant of gravity (6.67 × 10–11 Nm2/kg2).
Solution
Let’s substitute our values and see what we get. Take an H = 22 km/s per million light-years. We need to
convert both km and light-years into meters for consistency. A million light-years = 106 × 9.5 × 1015 m = 9.5 ×
1021 m. And 22 km/s = 2.2 × 104 m/s. That makes H = 2.3 ×10–18 /s and H2 = 5.36 × 10–36 /s2. So,
which we can round off to the 10–26 kg/m3. (To make the units work out, you have to know that N, the unit
of force, is the same as kg × m/s2.)
Now we can compare densities we measure in the universe to this critical value. Note that density is mass
per unit volume, but energy has an equivalent mass of m = E/c2 (from Einstein’s equation E = mc2).
29.2 • A Model of the Universe
Check Your Learning
a.
A single grain of dust has a mass of about 1.1 × 10–13 kg. If the average mass-energy density of space is
equal to the critical density on average, how much space would be required to produce a total massenergy equal to a dust grain?
b.
If the Hubble constant were twice what it actually is, how much would the critical density be?
Answer:
a. In this case, the average mass-energy in a volume V of space is E = ρcritV. Thus, for space with critical
density, we require that
Thus, the sides of a cube of space with mass-energy density averaging that of the critical density would
need to be slightly greater than 10 km to contain the total energy equal to a single grain of dust!
b. Since the critical density goes as the square of the Hubble constant, by doubling the Hubble parameter,
the critical density would increase by a factor a four. So if the Hubble constant was 44 km/s per million
light-years instead of 22 km/s per million light-years, the critical density would be
We can start our survey of how dense the cosmos is by ignoring the dark energy and just estimating the
density of all matter in the universe, including ordinary matter and dark matter. Here is where the
cosmological principle really comes in handy. Since the universe is the same all over (at least on large scales),
we only need to measure how much matter exists in a (large) representative sample of it. This is similar to the
way a representative survey of a few thousand people can tell us whom the millions of residents of the US
prefer for president.
There are several methods by which we can try to determine the average density of matter in space. One way
is to count all the galaxies out to a given distance and use estimates of their masses, including dark matter, to
calculate the average density. Such estimates indicate a density of about 1 to 2 × 10–27 kg/m3 (10 to 20% of
critical), which by itself is too small to stop the expansion.
A lot of the dark matter lies outside the boundaries of galaxies, so this inventory is not yet complete. But even
if we add an estimate of the dark matter outside galaxies, our total won’t rise beyond about 30% of the critical
density. We’ll pin these numbers down more precisely later in this chapter, where we will also include the
effects of dark energy.
In any case, even if we ignore dark energy, the evidence is that the universe will continue to expand forever.
The discovery of dark energy that is causing the rate of expansion to speed up only strengthens this
conclusion. Things definitely do not look good for fans of the closed universe (big crunch) model.
What Might the Universe Be Like in the Distant Future?
Some say the world will end in fire,
Some say in ice.
From what I’ve tasted of desire
I hold with those who favor fire.
MAKING CONNECTIONS
29 • The Big Bang
—From the poem “Fire and Ice” by Robert Frost (1923)
Given the destructive power of impacting asteroids, expanding red giants, and nearby supernovae, our
species may not be around in the remote future. Nevertheless, you might enjoy speculating about what it
would be like to live in a much, much older universe.
The observed acceleration makes it likely that we will have continued expansion into the indefinite future. If
the universe expands forever (R increases without limit), the clusters of galaxies will spread ever farther
apart with time. As eons pass, the universe will get thinner, colder, and darker.
Within each galaxy, stars will continue to go through their lives, eventually becoming white dwarfs, neutron
stars, and black holes. Low-mass stars might take a long time to finish their evolution, but in this model, we
would literally have all the time in the world. Ultimately, even the white dwarfs will cool down to be black
dwarfs, any neutron stars that reveal themselves as pulsars will slowly stop spinning, and black holes with
accretion disks will one day complete their “meals.” The remains of stars will all be dark and difficult to
observe.
This means that the light that now reveals galaxies to us will eventually go out. Even if a small pocket of raw
material were left in one unsung corner of a galaxy, ready to be turned into a fresh cluster of stars, we will
only have to wait until the time that their evolution is also complete. And time is one thing this model of the
universe has plenty of. There will surely come a time when all the stars are out, galaxies are as dark as
space, and no source of heat remains to help living things survive. Then the lifeless galaxies will just
continue to move apart in their lightless realm.
If this view of the future seems discouraging (from a human perspective), keep in mind that we
fundamentally do not understand why the expansion rate is currently accelerating. Thus, our speculations
about the future are just that: speculations. You might take heart in the knowledge that science is always a
progress report. The most advanced ideas about the universe from a hundred years ago now strike us as
rather primitive. It may well be that our best models of today will in a hundred or a thousand years also
seem rather simplistic and that there are other factors determining the ultimate fate of the universe of
which we are still completely unaware.
Ages of Distant Galaxies
In the chapter on Galaxies, we discussed how we can use Hubble’s law to measure the distance to a galaxy.
But that simple method only works with galaxies that are not too far away. Once we get to large distances, we
are looking so far into the past that we must take into account changes in the rate of the expansion of the
universe. Since we cannot measure these changes directly, we must assume one of the models of the universe
to be able to convert large redshifts into distances.
This is why astronomers squirm when reporters and students ask them exactly how far away some newly
discovered distant quasar or galaxy is. We really can’t give an answer without first explaining the model of the
universe we are assuming in calculating it (by which time a reporter or student is long gone or asleep).
Specifically, we must use a model that includes the change in the expansion rate with time. The key
ingredients of the model are the amounts of matter, including dark matter, and the equivalent mass
(according to E = mc2) of the dark energy along with the Hubble constant.
Elsewhere in this book, we have estimated the mass density of ordinary matter plus dark matter as roughly 0.3
times the critical density, and the mass equivalent of dark energy as roughly 0.7 times the critical density. We
will refer to these values as the “standard model of the universe.” The latest (slightly improved) estimates for
these values and the evidence for them will be given later in this chapter. Calculations also require the current
value of the Hubble constant. For Table 29.1, we have adopted a Hubble constant of 67.3 kilometers/second/
million parsecs (rather than rounding it to 70 kilometers/second/million parsecs), which is consistent with the
29.2 • A Model of the Universe
13.8 billion-year age of the universe estimated by the latest observations.
Once we assume a model, we can use it to calculate the age of the universe at the time an object emitted the
light we see. As an example, Table 29.1 lists the times that light was emitted by objects at different redshifts as
fractions of the current age of the universe. The times are given for two very different models so you can get a
feeling for the fact that the calculated ages are fairly similar. The first model assumes that the universe has a
critical density of matter and no dark energy. The second model is the standard model described in the
preceding paragraph. The first column in the table is the redshift, which is given by the equation z = Δλ/λ0 and
is a measure of how much the wavelength of light has been stretched by the expansion of the universe on its
long journey to us.
Ages of the Universe at Different Redshifts
Redshift
Percent of Current Age of Universe
When the Light Was Emitted (mass
= critical density)
Percent of Current Age of Universe When the Light
Was Emitted (mass = 0.3 critical density; dark
energy = 0.7 critical density)
100 (now)
100 (now)
0.5
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
8.0
11.9
2.1
2.7
Infinite
Table 29.1
Notice that as we find objects with higher and higher redshifts, we are looking back to smaller and smaller
fractions of the age of the universe. The highest observed redshifts as this book is being written are close to 12
(Figure 29.10). As Table 29.1 shows, we are seeing these galaxies as they were when the universe was only
about 3% as old as it is now. They were already formed only about 700 million years after the Big Bang.
29 • The Big Bang
Figure 29.10 Hubble Ultra-Deep Field. This image, called the Hubble Ultra Deep Field, shows faint galaxies, seen very far away and
therefore very far back in time. The colored squares in the main image outline the locations of the galaxies. Enlarged views of each
galaxy are shown in the black-and-white images. The red lines mark each galaxy’s location. The “redshift” of each galaxy is indicated
below each box, denoted by the symbol “z.” The redshift measures how much a galaxy’s ultraviolet and visible light has been
stretched to infrared wavelengths by the universe’s expansion. The larger the redshift, the more distant the galaxy, and therefore
the further astronomers are seeing back in time. One of the seven galaxies may be a distance breaker, observed at a redshift of 11.9.
If this redshift is confirmed by additional measurements, the galaxy is seen as it appeared only 380 million years after the Big Bang,
when the universe was less than 3% of its present age. (credit: modification of work by NASA, ESA, R. Ellis (Caltech), and the UDF 2012
Team)
29.3
The Beginning of the Universe
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe what the universe was like during the first few minutes after it began to expand
Explain how the first new elements were formed during the first few minutes after the Big Bang
Describe how the contents of the universe change as the temperature of the universe decreases
The best evidence we have today indicates that the first galaxies did not begin to form until a few hundred
million years after the Big Bang. What were things like before there were galaxies and space had not yet
stretched very significantly? Amazingly, scientists have been able to calculate in some detail what was
happening in the universe in the first few minutes after the Big Bang.
29.3 • The Beginning of the Universe
The History of the Idea
It is one thing to say the universe had a beginning (as the equations of general relativity imply) and quite
another to describe that beginning. The Belgian priest and cosmologist Georges Lemaître was probably the
first to propose a specific model for the Big Bang itself (Figure 29.11). He envisioned all the matter of the
universe starting in one great bulk he called the primeval atom, which then broke into tremendous numbers
of pieces. Each of these pieces continued to fragment further until they became the present atoms of the
universe, created in a vast nuclear fission. In a popular account of his theory, Lemaître wrote, “The evolution of
the world could be compared to a display of fireworks just ended—some few red wisps, ashes, and smoke.
Standing on a well-cooled cinder, we see the slow fading of the suns and we try to recall the vanished brilliance
of the origin of the worlds.”
Figure 29.11 Abbé Georges Lemaître (1894–1966). This Belgian cosmologist studied theology at Mechelen and mathematics and
physics at the University of Leuven. It was there that he began to explore the expansion of the universe and postulated its explosive
beginning. He actually predicted Hubble’s law 2 years before its verification, and he was the first to consider seriously the physical
processes by which the universe began.
View a short video (https://openstax.org/l/30Lemaitrevid) about the work of Lemaître, considered by some
to be the father of the Big Bang theory.
Physicists today know much more about nuclear physics than was known in the 1920s, and they have shown
that the primeval fission model cannot be correct. Yet Lemaître’s vision was in some respects quite prophetic.
We still believe that everything was together at the beginning; it was just not in the form of matter we now
know. Basic physical principles tell us that when the universe was much denser, it was also much hotter, and
that it cools as it expands, much as gas cools when sprayed from an aerosol can.
By the 1940s, scientists knew that fusion of hydrogen into helium was the source of the Sun’s energy. Fusion
requires high temperatures, and the early universe must have been hot. Based on these ideas, American
physicist George Gamow (Figure 29.12) suggested a universe with a different kind of beginning that involved
nuclear fusion instead of fission. Ralph Alpher worked out the details for his PhD thesis, and the results were
published in 1948. (Gamow, who had a quirky sense of humor, decided at the last minute to add the name of
physicist Hans Bethe to their paper, so that the coauthors on this paper about the beginning of things would
be Alpher, Bethe, and Gamow, a pun on the first three letters of the Greek alphabet: alpha, beta, and gamma.)
LINK TO LEARNING
29 • The Big Bang
Gamow’s universe started with fundamental particles that built up the heavy elements by fusion in the Big
Bang.
Figure 29.12 George Gamow and Collaborators. This composite image shows George Gamow emerging like a genie from a bottle
of ylem, a Greek term for the original substance from which the world formed. Gamow revived the term to describe the material of
the hot Big Bang. Flanking him are Robert Herman (left) and Ralph Alpher (right), with whom he collaborated in working out the
physics of the Big Bang. (The modern composer Karlheinz Stockhausen was inspired by Gamow’s ideas to write a piece of music
called Ylem, in which the players actually move away from the stage as they perform, simulating the expansion of the universe.)
Gamow’s ideas were close to our modern view, except we now know that the early universe remained hot
enough for fusion for only a short while. Thus, only the three lightest elements—hydrogen, helium, and a
small amount of lithium—were formed in appreciable abundances at the beginning. The heavier elements
formed later in stars. Since the 1940s, many astronomers and physicists have worked on a detailed theory of
what happened in the early stages of the universe.
The First Few Minutes
Let’s start with the first few minutes following the Big Bang. Three basic ideas hold the key to tracing the
changes that occurred during the time just after the universe began. The first, as we have already mentioned,
is that the universe cools as it expands. Figure 29.13 shows how the temperature changes with the passage of
time. Note that a huge span of time, from a tiny fraction of a second to billions of years, is summarized in this
diagram. In the first fraction of a second, the universe was unimaginably hot. By the time 0.01 second had
elapsed, the temperature had dropped to 100 billion (1011) K. After about 3 minutes, it had fallen to about 1
billion (109) K, still some 70 times hotter than the interior of the Sun. After a few hundred thousand years, the
temperature was down to a mere 3000 K, and the universe has continued to cool since that time.
29.3 • The Beginning of the Universe
Figure 29.13 Temperature of the Universe. This graph shows how the temperature of the universe varies with time as predicted by
the standard model of the Big Bang. Note that both the temperature (vertical axis) and the time in seconds (horizontal axis) change
over vast scales on this compressed diagram.
All of these temperatures but the last are derived from theoretical calculations since (obviously) no one was
there to measure them directly. As we shall see in the next section, however, we have actually detected the
feeble glow of radiation emitted at a time when the universe was a few hundred thousand years old. We can
measure the characteristics of that radiation to learn what things were like long ago. Indeed, the fact that we
have found this ancient glow is one of the strongest arguments in favor of the Big Bang model.
The second step in understanding the evolution of the universe is to realize that at very early times, it was so
hot that it contained mostly radiation (and not the matter that we see today). The photons that filled the
universe could collide and produce material particles; that is, under the conditions just after the Big Bang,
energy could turn into matter (and matter could turn into energy). We can calculate how much mass is
produced from a given amount of energy by using Einstein’s formula E = mc2 (see the chapter on The Sun: A
Nuclear Powerhouse).
The idea that energy could turn into matter in the universe at large is a new one for many students, since it is
not part of our everyday experience. That’s because, when we compare the universe today to what it was like
right after the Big Bang, we live in cold, hard times. The photons in the universe today typically have far-less
energy than the amount required to make new matter. In the discussion on the source of the Sun’s energy in
The Sun: A Nuclear Powerhouse, we briefly mentioned that when subatomic particles of matter and antimatter
collide, they turn into pure energy. But the reverse, energy turning into matter and antimatter, is equally
possible. This process has been observed in particle accelerators around the world. If we have enough energy,
under the right circumstances, new particles of matter (and antimatter) are indeed created —and the
conditions were right during the first few minutes after the expansion of the universe began.
Our third key point is that the hotter the universe was, the more energetic were the photons available to make
matter and antimatter (see Figure 29.13). To take a specific example, at a temperature of 6 billion (6 × 109) K,
the collision of two typical photons can create an electron and its antimatter counterpart, a positron. If the
temperature exceeds 1014 K, much more massive protons and antiprotons can be created.
The Evolution of the Early Universe
Keeping these three ideas in mind, we can trace the evolution of the universe from the time it was about 0.01
second old and had a temperature of about 100 billion K. Why not begin at the very beginning? There are as
yet no theories that allow us penetrate to a time before about 10–43 second (this number is a decimal point
followed by 42 zeros and then a one). It is so small that we cannot relate it to anything in our everyday
29 • The Big Bang
experience. When the universe was that young, its density was so high that the theory of general relativity is
not adequate to describe it, and even the concept of time breaks down.
Scientists, by the way, have been somewhat more successful in describing the universe when it was older than
10–43 second but still less than about 0.01 second old. We will take a look at some of these ideas later in this
chapter, but for now, we want to start with somewhat more familiar situations.
By the time the universe was 0.01 second old, it consisted of a soup of matter and radiation; the matter
included protons and neutrons, leftovers from an even younger and hotter universe. Each particle collided
rapidly with other particles. The temperature was no longer high enough to allow colliding photons to produce
neutrons or protons, but it was sufficient for the production of electrons and positrons (Figure 29.14). There
was probably also a sea of exotic subatomic particles that would later play a role as dark matter. All the
particles jiggled about on their own; it was still much too hot for protons and neutrons to combine to form the
nuclei of atoms.
Figure 29.14 Particle Interactions in the Early Universe. (a) In the first fractions of a second, when the universe was very hot,
energy was converted into particles and antiparticles. The reverse reaction also happened: a particle and antiparticle could collide
and produce energy. (b) As the temperature of the universe decreased, the energy of typical photons became too low to create
matter. Instead, existing particles fused to create such nuclei as deuterium and helium. (c) Later, it became cool enough for electrons
to settle down with nuclei and make neutral atoms. Most of the universe was still hydrogen.
Think of the universe at this time as a seething cauldron, with photons colliding and interchanging energy, and
sometimes being destroyed to create a pair of particles. The particles also collided with one another.
Frequently, a matter particle and an antimatter particle met and turned each other into a burst of gamma-ray
radiation.
Among the particles created in the early phases of the universe was the ghostly neutrino (see The Sun: A
Nuclear Powerhouse), which today interacts only very rarely with ordinary matter. In the crowded conditions
of the very early universe, however, neutrinos ran into so many electrons and positrons that they experienced
frequent interactions despite their “antisocial” natures.
By the time the universe was a little more than 1 second old, the density had dropped to the point where
neutrinos no longer interacted with matter but simply traveled freely through space. In fact, these neutrinos
should now be all around us. Since they have been traveling through space unimpeded (and hence
unchanged) since the universe was 1 second old, measurements of their properties would offer one of the
best tests of the Big Bang model. Unfortunately, the very characteristic that makes them so useful—the fact
that they interact so weakly with matter that they have survived unaltered for all but the first second of
time—also renders them unable to be measured, at least with present techniques. Perhaps someday someone
29.3 • The Beginning of the Universe
will devise a way to capture these elusive messengers from the past.
Atomic Nuclei Form
When the universe was about 3 minutes old and its temperature was down to about 900 million K, protons and
neutrons could combine. At higher temperatures, these atomic nuclei had immediately been blasted apart by
interactions with high-energy photons and thus could not survive. But at the temperatures and densities
reached between 3 and 4 minutes after the beginning, deuterium (a proton and neutron) lasted long enough
that collisions could convert some of it into helium, (Figure 29.14). In essence, the entire universe was acting
the way centers of stars do today—fusing new elements from simpler components. In addition, a little bit of
element 3, lithium, could also form.
This burst of cosmic fusion was only a brief interlude, however. By 4 minutes after the Big Bang, more helium
was having trouble forming. The universe was still expanding and cooling down. After the formation of helium
and some lithium, the temperature had dropped so low that the fusion of helium nuclei into still-heavier
elements could not occur. No elements beyond lithium could form in the first few minutes. That 4-minute
period was the end of the time when the entire universe was a fusion factory. In the cool universe we know
today, the fusion of new elements is limited to the centers of stars and the explosions of supernovae.
Still, the fact that the Big Bang model allows the creation of a good deal of helium is the answer to a longstanding mystery in astronomy. Put simply, there is just too much helium in the universe to be explained by
what happens inside stars. All the generations of stars that have produced helium since the Big Bang cannot
account for the quantity of helium we observe. Furthermore, even the oldest stars and the most distant
galaxies show significant amounts of helium. These observations find a natural explanation in the synthesis of
helium by the Big Bang itself during the first few minutes of time. We estimate that 10 times more helium was
manufactured in the first 4 minutes of the universe than in all the generations of stars during the succeeding
10 to 15 billion years.
Learning from Deuterium
We can learn many things from the way the early universe made atomic nuclei. It turns out that all of the
deuterium (a hydrogen nucleus with a neutron in it) in the universe was formed during the first 4 minutes. In
stars, any region hot enough to fuse two protons to form a deuterium nucleus is also hot enough to change it
further—either by destroying it through a collision with an energetic photon or by converting it into helium
through nuclear reactions.
The amount of deuterium that can be produced in the first 4 minutes of creation depends on the density of the
universe at the time deuterium was formed. If the density were relatively high, nearly all the deuterium would
have been converted into helium through interactions with protons, just as it is in stars. If the density were
relatively low, then the universe would have expanded and thinned out rapidly enough that some deuterium
would have survived. The amount of deuterium we see today thus gives us a clue to the density of the
universe when it was about 4 minutes old. Theoretical models can relate the density then to the density now;
thus, measurements of the abundance of deuterium today can give us an estimate of the current density of
the universe.
The measurements of deuterium indicate that the present-day density of ordinary matter—protons and
neutrons—is about 5 × 10–28 kg/m3. Deuterium can only provide an estimate of the density of ordinary matter
because the abundance of deuterium is determined by the particles that interact to form it, namely protons
and neutrons alone. From the abundance of deuterium, we know that not enough protons and neutrons are
present, by a factor of about 20, to produce a critical-density universe.
We do know, however, that there are dark matter particles that add to the overall matter density of the
universe, which is then higher than what is calculated for ordinary matter alone. Because dark matter particles
do not affect the production of deuterium, measurement of the deuterium abundance cannot tell us how
29 • The Big Bang
much dark matter exists. Dark matter is made of some exotic kind of particle, not yet detected in any
earthbound laboratory. It is definitely not made of protons and neutrons like the readers of this book.
29.4
The Cosmic Microwave Background
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain why we can observe the afterglow of the hot, early universe
Discuss the properties of this afterglow as we see it today, including its average temperature and the size
of its temperature fluctuations
Describe open, flat, and curved universes and explain which type of universe is supported by observations
Summarize our current knowledge of the basic properties of the universe including its age and contents
The description of the first few minutes of the universe is based on theoretical calculations. It is crucial,
however, that a scientific theory should be testable. What predictions does it make? And do observations show
those predictions to be accurate? One success of the theory of the first few minutes of the universe is the
correct prediction of the amount of helium in the universe.
Another prediction is that a significant milestone in the history of the universe occurred about 380,000 years
after the Big Bang. Scientists have directly observed what the universe was like at this early stage, and these
observations offer some of the strongest support for the Big Bang theory. To find out what this milestone was,
let’s look at what theory tells us about what happened during the first few hundred thousand years after the
Big Bang.
The fusion of helium and lithium was completed when the universe was about 4 minutes old. The universe
then continued to resemble the interior of a star in some ways for a few hundred thousand years more. It
remained hot and opaque, with radiation being scattered from one particle to another. It was still too hot for
electrons to “settle down” and become associated with a particular nucleus; such free electrons are especially
effective at scattering photons, thus ensuring that no radiation ever got very far in the early universe without
having its path changed. In a way, the universe was like an enormous crowd right after a popular concert; if
you get separated from a friend, even if he is wearing a flashing button, it is impossible to see through the
dense crowd to spot him. Only after the crowd clears is there a path for the light from his button to reach you.
The Universe Becomes Transparent
Not until a few hundred thousand years after the Big Bang, when the temperature had dropped to about 3000
K and the density of atomic nuclei to about 1000 per cubic centimeter, did the electrons and nuclei manage to
combine to form stable atoms of hydrogen and helium (Figure 29.14). With no free electrons to scatter
photons, the universe became transparent for the first time in cosmic history. From this point on, matter and
radiation interacted much less frequently; we say that they decoupled from each other and evolved separately.
Suddenly, electromagnetic radiation could really travel, and it has been traveling through the universe ever
since.
Discovery of the Cosmic Background Radiation
If the model of the universe described in the previous section is correct, then—as we look far outward in the
universe and thus far back in time—the first “afterglow” of the hot, early universe should still be detectable.
Observations of it would be very strong evidence that our theoretical calculations about how the universe
evolved are correct. As we shall see, we have indeed detected the radiation emitted at this photon decoupling
time, when radiation began to stream freely through the universe without interacting with matter (Figure
29.15).
29.4 • The Cosmic Microwave Background
Figure 29.15 Cosmic Microwave Background and Clouds Compared. (a) Early in the universe, photons (electromagnetic energy)
were scattering off the crowded, hot, charged particles and could not get very far without colliding with another particle. But after
electrons and photons settled into neutral atoms, there was far less scattering, and photons could travel over vast distances. The
universe became transparent. As we look out in space and back in time, we can’t see back beyond this time. (b) This is similar to
what happens when we see clouds in Earth’s atmosphere. Water droplets in a cloud scatter light very efficiently, but clear air lets
light travel over long distances. So as we look up into the atmosphere, our vision is blocked by the cloud layers and we can’t see
beyond them. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
The detection of this afterglow was initially an accident. In the late 1940s, Ralph Alpher and Robert Herman,
working with George Gamow, realized that just before the universe became transparent, it must have been
radiating like a blackbody at a temperature of about 3000 K—the temperature at which hydrogen atoms could
begin to form. If we could have seen that radiation just after neutral atoms formed, it would have resembled
radiation from a reddish star. It was as if a giant fireball filled the whole universe.
But that was nearly 14 billion years ago, and, in the meantime, the scale of the universe has increased a
thousand fold. This expansion has increased the wavelength of the radiation by a factor of 1000 (see Figure
29.7). According to Wien’s law, which relates wavelength and temperature, the expansion has correspondingly
lowered the temperature by a factor of 1000 (see the chapter on Radiation and Spectra). The cosmic
background behaves like a blackbody and should therefore have a spectrum that obeys Wien’s Law.
Alpher and Herman predicted that the glow from the fireball should now be at radio wavelengths and should
resemble the radiation from a blackbody at a temperature only a few degrees above absolute zero. Since the
fireball was everywhere throughout the universe, the radiation left over from it should also be everywhere. If
our eyes were sensitive to radio wavelengths, the whole sky would appear to glow very faintly. However, our
eyes can’t see at these wavelengths, and at the time Alpher and Herman made their prediction, there were no
instruments that could detect the glow. Over the years, their prediction was forgotten.
In the mid-1960s, in Holmdel, New Jersey, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson of AT&T’s Bell Laboratories had built
a delicate microwave antenna (Figure 29.16) to measure astronomical sources, including supernova remnants
like Cassiopeia A (see the chapter on The Death of Stars). They were plagued with some unexpected
background noise, just like faint static on a radio, which they could not get rid of. The puzzling thing about this
radiation was that it seemed to be coming from all directions at once. This is very unusual in astronomy: after
all, most radiation has a specific direction where it is strongest—the direction of the Sun, or a supernova
29 • The Big Bang
remnant, or the disk of the Milky Way, for example.
Figure 29.16 Robert Wilson (left) and Arno Penzias (right). These two scientists are standing in front of the horn-shaped antenna
with which they discovered the cosmic background radiation. The photo was taken in 1978, just after they received the Nobel Prize in
physics.
Penzias and Wilson at first thought that any radiation appearing to come from all directions must originate
from inside their telescope, so they took everything apart to look for the source of the noise. They even found
that some pigeons had roosted inside the big horn-shaped antenna and had left (as Penzias delicately put it)
“a layer of white, sticky, dielectric substance coating the inside of the antenna.” However, nothing the
scientists did could reduce the background radiation to zero, and they reluctantly came to accept that it must
be real, and it must be coming from space.
Penzias and Wilson were not cosmologists, but as they began to discuss their puzzling discovery with other
scientists, they were quickly put in touch with a group of astronomers and physicists at Princeton University (a
short drive away). These astronomers had—as it happened—been redoing the calculations of Alpher and
Herman from the 1940s and also realized that the radiation from the decoupling time should be detectable as
a faint afterglow of radio waves. The different calculations of what the observed temperature would be for this
cosmic microwave background (CMB)2 were uncertain, but all predicted less than 40 K.
Penzias and Wilson found the distribution of intensity at different radio wavelengths to correspond to a
temperature of 3.5 K. This is very cold—closer to absolute zero than most other astronomical
measurements—and a testament to how much space (and the waves within it) has stretched. Their
measurements have been repeated with better instruments, which give us a reading of 2.73 K. So Penzias and
Wilson came very close. Rounding this value, scientists often refer to “the 3-degree microwave background.”
Many other experiments on Earth and in space soon confirmed the discovery by Penzias and Wilson: The
radiation was indeed coming from all directions (it was isotropic) and matched the predictions of the Big Bang
theory with remarkable precision. Penzias and Wilson had inadvertently observed the glow from the primeval
fireball. They received the Nobel Prize for their work in 1978. And just before his death in 1966, Lemaître
learned that his “vanished brilliance” had been discovered and confirmed.
You may enjoy watching Three Degrees, a 26-minute video (https://openstax.org/l/30threedegvid) from
Bell Labs about Penzias and Wilson’s discovery of the cosmic background radiation (with interesting
historical footage).
LINK TO LEARNING
Recall that microwaves are in the radio region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
29.4 • The Cosmic Microwave Background
Properties of the Cosmic Microwave Background
One issue that worried astronomers is that Penzias and Wilson were measuring the background radiation
filling space through Earth’s atmosphere. What if that atmosphere is a source of radio waves or somehow
affected their measurements? It would be better to measure something this important from space.
The first accurate measurements of the CMB were made with a satellite orbiting Earth. Named the Cosmic
Background Explorer (COBE), it was launched by NASA in November 1989. The data it received quickly showed
that the CMB closely matches that expected from a blackbody with a temperature of 2.73 K (Figure 29.17). This
is exactly the result expected if the CMB was indeed redshifted radiation emitted by a hot gas that filled all of
space shortly after the universe began.
Figure 29.17 Cosmic Background Radiation. The solid line shows how the intensity of radiation should change with wavelength for
a blackbody with a temperature of 2.73 K. The boxes show the intensity of the cosmic background radiation as measured at various
wavelengths by COBE’s instruments. The fit is perfect. When this graph was first shown at a meeting of astronomers, they gave it a
standing ovation.
The first important conclusion from measurements of the CMB, therefore, is that the universe we have today
has indeed evolved from a hot, uniform state. This observation also provides direct support for the general
idea that we live in an evolving universe, since the universe is cooler today than it was in the beginning.
Small Differences in the CMB
It was known even before the launch of COBE that the CMB is extremely isotropic. In fact, its uniformity in
every direction is one of the best confirmations of the cosmological principle— that the universe is
homogenous and isotropic.
According to our theories, however, the temperature could not have been perfectly uniform when the CMB
was emitted. After all, the CMB is radiation that was scattered from the particles in the universe at the time of
decoupling. If the radiation were completely smooth, then all those particles must have been distributed
through space absolutely evenly. Yet it is those particles that have become all the galaxies and stars (and
astronomy students) that now inhabit the cosmos. Had the particles been completely smoothly distributed,
they could not have formed all the large-scale structures now present in the universe—the clusters and
superclusters of galaxies discussed in the last few chapters.
The early universe must have had tiny density fluctuations from which such structures could evolve. Regions of
higher-than-average density would have attracted additional matter and eventually grown into the galaxies
and clusters that we see today. It turns out that these denser regions would appear to us to be colder spots,
that is, they would have lower-than-average temperatures.
29 • The Big Bang
The reason that temperature and density are related can be explained this way. At the time of decoupling,
photons in a slightly denser portion of space had to expend some of their energy to escape the gravitational
force exerted by the surrounding gas. In losing energy, the photons became slightly colder than the overall
average temperature at the time of decoupling. Vice versa, photons that were located in a slightly less dense
portion of space lost less energy upon leaving it than other photons, thus appearing slightly hotter than
average. Therefore, if the seeds of present-day galaxies existed at the time that the CMB was emitted, we
should see some slight variations in the CMB temperature as we look in different directions in the sky.
Scientists working with the data from the COBE satellite did indeed detect very subtle temperature
differences—about 1 part in 100,000—in the CMB. The regions of lower-than-average temperature come in a
variety of sizes, but even the smallest of the colder areas detected by COBE is far too large to be the precursor
of an individual galaxy, or even a supercluster of galaxies. This is because the COBE instrument had “blurry
vision” (poor resolution) and could only measure large patches of the sky. We needed instruments with
“sharper vision.”
The most detailed measurements of the CMB have been obtained by two satellites launched more recently
than COBE. The results from the first of these satellites, the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP)
spacecraft, were published in 2003. In 2015, measurements from the Planck satellite extended the WMAP
measurements to even-higher spatial resolution and lower noise (Figure 29.18).
Figure 29.18 CMB Observations. This comparison shows how much detail can be seen in the observations of three satellites used to
measure the CMB. The CMB is a snapshot of the oldest light in our universe, imprinted on the sky when the universe was just about
380,000 years old. The first spacecraft, launched in 1989, is NASA’s Cosmic Background Explorer, or COBE. WMAP was launched in
29.4 • The Cosmic Microwave Background
2001, and Planck was launched in 2009. The three panels show 10-square-degree patches of all-sky maps. This cosmic background
radiation image (bottom) is an all-sky map of the CMB as observed by the Planck mission. The colors in the map represent different
temperatures: red for warmer and blue for cooler. These tiny temperature fluctuations correspond to regions of slightly different
densities, representing the seeds of all future structures: the stars, galaxies, and galaxy clusters of today. (credit top: modification of
work by NASA/JPL-Caltech/ESA; credit bottom: modification of work by ESA and the Planck Collaboration)
Theoretical calculations show that the sizes of the hot and cold spots in the CMB depend on the geometry of
the universe and hence on its total density. (It’s not at all obvious that it should do so, and it takes some pretty
fancy calculations—way beyond the level of our text—to make the connection, but having such a dependence
is very useful.) The total density we are discussing here includes both the amount of mass in the universe and
the mass equivalent of the dark energy. That is, we must add together mass and energy: ordinary matter, dark
matter, and the dark energy that is speeding up the expansion.
To see why this works, remember (from the chapter on Black Holes and Curved Spacetime) that with his theory
of general relativity, Einstein showed that matter can curve space and that the amount of curvature depends
on the amount of matter present. Therefore, the total amount of matter in the universe (including dark matter
and the equivalent matter contribution by dark energy), determines the overall geometry of space. Just like the
geometry of space around a black hole has a curvature to it, so the entire universe may have a curvature. Let’s
take a look at the possibilities (Figure 29.19).
If the density of matter is higher than the critical density, the universe will eventually collapse. In such a closed
universe, two initially parallel rays of light will eventually meet. This kind of geometry is referred to as spherical
geometry. If the density of matter is less than critical, the universe will expand forever. Two initially parallel
rays of light will diverge, and this is referred to as hyperbolic geometry. In a critical-density universe, two
parallel light rays never meet, and the expansion comes to a halt only at some time infinitely far in the future.
We refer to this as a flat universe, and the kind of Euclidean geometry you learned in high school applies in
this type of universe.
Figure 29.19 Picturing Space Curvature for the Entire Universe. The density of matter and energy determines the overall
geometry of space. If the density of the universe is greater than the critical density, then the universe will ultimately collapse and
space is said to be closed like the surface of a sphere. If the density exactly equals the critical density, then space is flat like a sheet of
paper; the universe will expand forever, with the rate of expansion coming to a halt infinitely far in the future. If the density is less
than critical, then the expansion will continue forever and space is said to be open and negatively curved like the surface of a saddle
(where more space than you expect opens up as you move farther away). Note that the red lines in each diagram show what
happens in each kind of space—they are initially parallel but follow different paths depending on the curvature of space. Remember
that these drawings are trying to show how space for the entire universe is “warped”—this can’t be seen locally in the small amount
of space that we humans occupy.
If the density of the universe is equal to the critical density, then the hot and cold spots in the CMB should
typically be about a degree in size. If the density is greater than critical, then the typical sizes will be larger
than one degree. If the universe has a density less than critical, then the structures will appear smaller. In
Figure 29.20, you can see the differences easily. WMAP and Planck observations of the CMB confirmed earlier
experiments that we do indeed live in a flat, critical-density universe.
29 • The Big Bang
Figure 29.20 Comparison of CMB Observations with Possible Models of the Universe. Cosmological simulations predict that if
our universe has critical density, then the CMB images will be dominated by hot and cold spots of around one degree in size (bottom
center). If, on the other hand, the density is higher than critical (and the universe will ultimately collapse), then the images’ hot and
cold spots will appear larger than one degree (bottom left). If the density of the universe is less than critical (and the expansion will
continue forever), then the structures will appear smaller (bottom right). As the measurements show, the universe is at critical
density. The measurements shown were made by a balloon-borne instrument called BOOMERanG (Balloon Observations of
Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics), which was flown in Antarctica. Subsequent satellite observations by WMAP and
Planck confirm the BOOMERanG result. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Key numbers from an analysis of the Planck data give us the best values currently available for some of the
basic properties of the universe:
•
Age of universe: 13.799 ± 0.038 billion years (Note: That means we know the age of the universe to within
38 million years. Amazing!)
•
Hubble constant: 67.31 ± 0.96 kilometers/second/million parsecs (in the units we’ve been using, 20.65
kilometers/second/million light-years)
•
Fraction of universe’s content that is “dark energy”: 68.5% ± 1.3%
•
Fraction of the universe’s content that is matter: 31.5% ± 1.3%
Note that this value for the Hubble constant is slightly smaller than the value of 70 kilometers/second/million
parsecs that we have adopted in this book. In fact, the value derived from measurements of redshifts is 73
kilometers/second/million parsecs. So precise is modern cosmology these days that scientists are working
hard to resolve this discrepancy. The fact that the difference between these two independent measurements is
so small is actually a remarkable achievement. Only a few decades ago, astronomers were arguing about
whether the Hubble constant was around 50 kilometers/second/million parsecs or 100 kilometers/second/
million parsecs.
29.4 • The Cosmic Microwave Background
Analysis of Planck data also shows that ordinary matter (mainly protons and neutrons) makes up 4.9% of the
total density. Dark matter plus normal matter add up to 31.5% of the total density. Dark energy contributes the
remaining 68.5%. The age of the universe at decoupling—that is, when the CMB was emitted—was 380,000
years.
Perhaps the most surprising result from the high-precision measurements by WMAP and the even higherprecision measurements from Planck is that there were no surprises. The model of cosmology with ordinary
matter at about 5%, dark matter at about 25%, and dark energy about 70% has survived since the late 1990s
when cosmologists were forced in that direction by the supernovae data. In other words, the very strange
universe that we have been describing, with only about 5% of its contents being made up of the kinds of
matter we are familiar with here on Earth, really seems to be the universe we live in.
After the CMB was emitted, the universe continued to expand and cool off. By 400 to 500 million years after the
Big Bang, the very first stars and galaxies had already formed. Deep in the interiors of stars, matter was
reheated, nuclear reactions were ignited, and the more gradual synthesis of the heavier elements that we
have discussed throughout this book began.
We conclude this quick tour of our model of the early universe with a reminder. You must not think of the Big
Bang as a localized explosion in space, like an exploding superstar. There were no boundaries and there was
no single site where the explosion happened. It was an explosion of space (and time and matter and energy)
that happened everywhere in the universe. All matter and energy that exist today, including the particles of
which you are made, came from the Big Bang. We were, and still are, in the midst of a Big Bang; it is all around
us.
29.5
What Is the Universe Really Made Of?
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Specify what fraction of the density of the universe is contributed by stars and galaxies and how much
ordinary matter (such as hydrogen, helium, and other elements we are familiar with here on Earth) makes up
the overall density
Describe how ideas about the contents of the universe have changed over the last 50 years
Explain why it is so difficult to determine what dark matter really is
Explain why dark matter helped galaxies form quickly in the early universe
Summarize the evolution of the universe from the time the CMB was emitted to the present day
The model of the universe we described in the previous section is the simplest model that explains the
observations. It assumes that general relativity is the correct theory of gravity throughout the universe. With
this assumption, the model then accounts for the existence and structure of the CMB; the abundances of the
light elements deuterium, helium, and lithium; and the acceleration of the expansion of the universe. All of the
observations to date support the validity of the model, which is referred to as the standard (or concordance)
model of cosmology.
Figure 29.21 and Table 29.2 summarize the current best estimates of the contents of the universe. Luminous
matter in stars and galaxies and neutrinos contributes about 1% of the mass required to reach critical density.
Another 4% is mainly in the form of hydrogen and helium in the space between stars and in intergalactic
space. Dark matter accounts for about an additional 27% of the critical density. The mass equivalent of dark
energy (according to E = mc2) then supplies the remaining 68% of the critical density.
29 • The Big Bang
Figure 29.21 Composition of the Universe. Only about 5% of all the mass and energy in the universe is matter with which we are
familiar here on Earth. Most ordinary matter consists of hydrogen and helium located in interstellar and intergalactic space. Only
about one-half of 1% of the critical density of the universe is found in stars. Dark matter and dark energy, which have not yet been
detected in earthbound laboratories, account for 95% of the contents of the universe.
What Different Kinds of Objects Contribute to the Density of the Universe
Object
Density as a Percent of Critical Density
Luminous matter (stars, etc.)
<1
Hydrogen and helium in interstellar and intergalactic space
Dark matter
Equivalent mass density of the dark energy
Table 29.2
This table should shock you. What we are saying is that 95% of the stuff of the universe is either dark matter or
dark energy—neither of which has ever been detected in a laboratory here on Earth. This whole textbook,
which has focused on objects that emit electromagnetic radiation, has generally been ignoring 95% of what is
out there. Who says there aren’t big mysteries yet to solve in science!
Figure 29.22 shows how our ideas of the composition of the universe have changed over just the past three
decades. The fraction of the universe that we think is made of the same particles as astronomy students has
been decreasing steadily.
29.5 • What Is the Universe Really Made Of?
Figure 29.22 Changing Estimates of the Content of the Universe. This diagram shows the changes in our understanding of the
contents of the universe over the past three decades. In the 1970s, we suspected that most of the matter in the universe was
invisible, but we thought that this matter might be ordinary matter (protons, neutrons, etc.) that was simply not producing
electromagnetic radiation. By the 1980s, it was becoming likely that most of the dark matter was made of something we had not yet
detected on Earth. By the late 1990s, a variety of experiments had shown that we live in a critical -density universe and that dark
energy contributes about 70% of what is required to reach critical density. Note how the estimate of the relative importance of
ordinary luminous matter (shown in yellow) has diminished over time.
What Is Dark Matter?
Many astronomers find the situation we have described very satisfying. Several independent experiments now
agree on the type of universe we live in and on the inventory of what it contains. We seem to be very close to
having a cosmological model that explains nearly everything. Others are not yet ready to jump on the
bandwagon. They say, “show me the 96% of the universe we can’t detect directly—for example, find me some
dark matter!”
At first, astronomers thought that dark matter might be hidden in objects that appear dark because they emit
no light (e.g., black holes) or that are too faint to be observed at large distances (e.g., planets or white dwarfs).
However, these objects would be made of ordinary matter, and the deuterium abundance tells us that no
more than 5% of the critical density consists of ordinary matter.
Another possible form that dark matter can take is some type of elementary particle that we have not yet
detected here on Earth—a particle that has mass and exists in sufficient abundance to contribute 23% of the
critical density. Some physics theories predict the existence of such particles. One class of these particles has
been given the name WIMPs, which stands for weakly interacting massive particles. Since these particles do
not participate in nuclear reactions leading to the production of deuterium, the deuterium abundance puts no
limits on how many WIMPs might be in the universe. (A number of other exotic particles have also been
suggested as prime constituents of dark matter, but we will confine our discussion to WIMPs as a useful
example.)
If large numbers of WIMPs do exist, then some of them should be passing through our physics laboratories
right now. The trick is to catch them. Since by definition they interact only weakly (infrequently) with other
matter, the chances that they will have a measurable effect are small. We don’t know the mass of these
particles, but various theories suggest that it might be a few to a few hundred times the mass of a proton. If
WIMPs are 60 times the mass of a proton, there would be about 10 million of them passing through your
outstretched hand every second—with absolutely no effect on you. If that seems too mind-boggling, bear in
mind that neutrinos interact weakly with ordinary matter, and yet we were able to “catch” them eventually.
Despite the challenges, more than 30 experiments designed to detect WIMPS are in operation or in the
29 • The Big Bang
planning stages. Predictions of how many times WIMPs might actually collide with the nucleus of an atom in
the instrument designed to detect them are in the range of 1 event per year to 1 event per 1000 years per
kilogram of detector. The detector must therefore be large. It must be shielded from radioactivity or other
types of particles, such as neutrons, passing through it, and hence these detectors are placed in deep mines.
The energy imparted to an atomic nucleus in the detector by collision with a WIMP will be small, and so the
detector must be cooled to a very low temperature.
The WIMP detectors are made out of crystals of germanium, silicon, or xenon. The detectors are cooled to a
few thousandths of a degree—very close to absolute zero. That means that the atoms in the detector are so
cold that they are scarcely vibrating at all. If a dark matter particle collides with one of the atoms, it will cause
the whole crystal to vibrate and the temperature therefore to increase ever so slightly. Some other interactions
may generate a detectable flash of light.
A different kind of search for WIMPs is being conducted at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, Europe’s
particle physics lab near Geneva, Switzerland. In this experiment, protons collide with enough energy
potentially to produce WIMPs. The LHC detectors cannot detect the WIMPs directly, but if WIMPs are
produced, they will pass through the detectors, carrying energy away with them. Experimenters will then add
up all the energy that they detect as a result of the collisions of protons to determine if any energy is missing.
So far, none of these experiments has detected WIMPs. Will the newer experiments pay off? Or will scientists
have to search for some other explanation for dark matter? Only time will tell (Figure 29.23).
Figure 29.23 Dark Matter. This cartoon from NASA takes a humorous look at how little we yet understand about dark matter.
(credit: NASA)
Dark Matter and the Formation of Galaxies
As elusive as dark matter may be in the current-day universe, galaxies could not have formed quickly without
it. Galaxies grew from density fluctuations in the early universe, and some had already formed only about
400–500 million years after the Big Bang. The observations with WMAP, Planck, and other experiments give us
information on the size of those density fluctuations. It turns out that the density variations we observe are
too small to have formed galaxies so soon after the Big Bang. In the hot, early universe, energetic photons
29.5 • What Is the Universe Really Made Of?
collided with hydrogen and helium, and kept them moving so rapidly that gravity was still not strong enough
to cause the atoms to come together to form galaxies. How can we reconcile this with the fact that galaxies did
form and are all around us?
Our instruments that measure the CMB give us information about density fluctuations only for ordinary
matter, which interacts with radiation. Dark matter, as its name indicates, does not interact with photons at all.
Dark matter could have had much greater variations in density and been able to come together to form
gravitational “traps” that could then have begun to attract ordinary matter immediately after the universe
became transparent. As ordinary matter became increasingly concentrated, it could have turned into galaxies
quickly thanks to these dark matter traps.
For an analogy, imagine a boulevard with traffic lights every half mile or so. Suppose you are part of a
motorcade of cars accompanied by police who lead you past each light, even if it is red. So, too, when the early
universe was opaque, radiation interacted with ordinary matter, imparting energy to it and carrying it along,
sweeping past the concentrations of dark matter. Now suppose the police leave the motorcade, which then
encounters some red lights. The lights act as traffic traps; approaching cars now have to stop, and so they
bunch up. Likewise, after the early universe became transparent, ordinary matter interacted with radiation
only occasionally and so could fall into the dark matter traps.
The Universe in a Nutshell
In the previous sections of this chapter, we traced the evolution of the universe progressively further back in
time. Astronomical discovery has followed this path historically, as new instruments and new techniques have
allowed us to probe ever closer to the beginning of time. The rate of expansion of the universe was
determined from measurements of nearby galaxies. Determinations of the abundances of deuterium, helium,
and lithium based on nearby stars and galaxies were used to put limits on how much ordinary matter is in the
universe. The motions of stars in galaxies and of galaxies within clusters of galaxies could only be explained if
there were large quantities of dark matter. Measurements of supernovae that exploded when the universe
was about half as old as it is now indicated that the rate of expansion of the universe has sped up since those
explosions occurred. Observations of extremely faint galaxies show that galaxies had begun to form when the
universe was only 400–500 million years old. And observations of the CMB confirmed early theories that the
universe was initially very hot.
But all this moving further and further backward in time might have left you a bit dizzy. So now let’s instead
show how the universe evolves as time moves forward.
Figure 29.24 summarizes the entire history of the observable universe from the beginning in a single diagram.
The universe was very hot when it began to expand. We have fossil remnants of the very early universe in the
form of neutrons, protons, electrons, and neutrinos, and the atomic nuclei that formed when the universe was
3–4 minutes old: deuterium, helium, and a small amount of lithium. Dark matter also remains, but we do not
yet know what form it is in.
29 • The Big Bang
Figure 29.24 History of the Universe. This image summarizes the changes that have occurred in the universe during the last 13.8
billion years. Protons, deuterium, helium, and some lithium were produced in the initial fireball. About 380,000 years after the Big
Bang, the universe became transparent to electromagnetic radiation for the first time. COBE, WMAP, Planck, and other instruments
have been used to study the radiation that was emitted at that time and that is still visible today (the CMB). The universe was then
dark (except for this background radiation) until the first stars and galaxies began to form only a few hundred million years after the
Big Bang. Existing space and ground-based telescopes have made substantial progress in studying the subsequent evolution of
galaxies. (credit: modification of work by NASA/WMAP Science Team)
The universe gradually cooled; when it was about 380,000 years old, and at a temperature of about 3000 K,
electrons combined with protons to form hydrogen atoms. At this point, as we saw, the universe became
transparent to light, and astronomers have detected the CMB emitted at this time. The universe still contained
no stars or galaxies, and so it entered what astronomers call “the dark ages” (since stars were not lighting up
the darkness). During the next several hundred million years, small fluctuations in the density of the dark
matter grew, forming gravitational traps that concentrated the ordinary matter, which began to form galaxies
about 400–500 million years after the Big Bang.
By the time the universe was about a billion years old, it had entered its own renaissance: it was again blazing
with radiation, but this time from newly formed stars, star clusters, and small galaxies. Over the next several
billion years, small galaxies merged to form the giants we see today. Clusters and superclusters of galaxies
began to grow, and the universe eventually began to resemble what we see nearby.
During the next 20 years, astronomers plan to build giant new telescopes both in space and on the ground to
explore even further back in time. In 2021, the James Webb Space Telescope, a 6.5-meter telescope that is the
successor to the Hubble Space Telescope, will be launched and assembled in space. The predictions are that
with this powerful instrument (see Figure 29.1) we should be able to look back far enough to analyze in detail
the formation of the first galaxies.
29.5 • What Is the Universe Really Made Of?
29.6
The Inflationary Universe
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe two important properties of the universe that the simple Big Bang model cannot explain
Explain why these two characteristics of the universe can be accounted for if there was a period of rapid
expansion (inflation) of the universe just after the Big Bang
Name the four forces that control all physical processes in the universe
The hot Big Bang model that we have been describing is remarkably successful. It accounts for the expansion
of the universe, explains the observations of the CMB, and correctly predicts the abundances of the light
elements. As it turns out, this model also predicts that there should be exactly three types of neutrinos in
nature, and this prediction has been confirmed by experiments with high-energy accelerators. We can’t relax
just yet, however. This standard model of the universe doesn’t explain all the observations we have made
about the universe as a whole.
Problems with the Standard Big Bang Model
There are a number of characteristics of the universe that can only be explained by considering further what
might have happened before the emission of the CMB. One problem with the standard Big Bang model is that
it does not explain why the density of the universe is equal to the critical density. The mass density could have
been, after all, so low and the effects of dark energy so high that the expansion would have been too rapid to
form any galaxies at all. Alternatively, there could have been so much matter that the universe would have
already begun to contract long before now. Why is the universe balanced so precisely on the knife edge of the
critical density?
Another puzzle is the remarkable uniformity of the universe. The temperature of the CMB is the same to about
1 part in 100,000 everywhere we look. This sameness might be expected if all the parts of the visible universe
were in contact at some point in time and had the time to come to the same temperature. In the same way, if
we put some ice into a glass of lukewarm water and wait a while, the ice will melt and the water will cool down
until they are the same temperature.
However, if we accept the standard Big Bang model, all parts of the visible universe were not in contact at any
time. The fastest that information can go from one point to another is the speed of light. There is a maximum
distance that light can have traveled from any point since the time the universe began—that’s the distance
light could have covered since then. This distance is called that point’s horizon distance because anything
farther away is “below its horizon”—unable to make contact with it. One region of space separated by more
than the horizon distance from another has been completely isolated from it through the entire history of the
universe.
If we measure the CMB in two opposite directions in the sky, we are observing regions that were significantly
beyond each other’s horizon distance at the time the CMB was emitted. We can see both regions, but they can
never have seen each other. Why, then, are their temperatures so precisely the same? According to the
standard Big Bang model, they have never been able to exchange information, and there is no reason they
should have identical temperatures. (It’s a little like seeing the clothes that all the students wear at two
schools in different parts of the world become identical, without the students ever having been in contact.) The
only explanation we could suggest was simply that the universe somehow started out being absolutely
uniform (which is like saying all students were born liking the same clothes). Scientists are always
uncomfortable when they must appeal to a special set of initial conditions to account for what they see.
The Inflationary Hypothesis
Some physicists suggested that these fundamental characteristics of the cosmos—its flatness and
uniformity—can be explained if shortly after the Big Bang (and before the emission of the CMB), the universe
29 • The Big Bang
experienced a sudden increase in size. A model universe in which this rapid, early expansion occurs is called an
inflationary universe. The inflationary universe is identical to the Big Bang universe for all time after the first
10–30 second. Prior to that, the model suggests that there was a brief period of extraordinarily rapid expansion
or inflation, during which the scale of the universe increased by a factor of about 1050 times more than
predicted by standard Big Bang models (Figure 29.25).
Figure 29.25 Expansion of the Universe. This graph shows how the scale factor of the observable universe changes with time for
the standard Big Bang model (red line) and for the inflationary model (blue line). (Note that the time scale at the bottom is extremely
compressed.) During inflation, regions that were very small and in contact with each other are suddenly blown up to be much larger
and outside each other’s horizon distance. The two models are the same for all times after 10–30 second.
Prior to (and during) inflation, all the parts of the universe that we can now see were so small and close to
each other that they could exchange information, that is, the horizon distance included all of the universe that
we can now observe. Before (and during) inflation, there was adequate time for the observable universe to
homogenize itself and come to the same temperature. Then, inflation expanded those regions tremendously,
so that many parts of the universe are now beyond each other’s horizon.
Another appeal of the inflationary model is its prediction that the density of the universe should be exactly
equal to the critical density. To see why this is so, remember that curvature of spacetime is intimately linked to
the density of matter. If the universe began with some curvature of its spacetime, one analogy for it might be
the skin of a balloon. The period of inflation was equivalent to blowing up the balloon to a tremendous size.
The universe became so big that from our vantage point, no curvature should be visible (Figure 29.26). In the
same way, Earth’s surface is so big that it looks flat to us no matter where we are. Calculations show that a
universe with no curvature is one that is at critical density. Universes with densities either higher or lower than
the critical density would show marked curvature. But we saw that the observations of the CMB in Figure
29.18, which show that the universe has critical density, rule out the possibility that space is significantly
curved.
29.6 • The Inflationary Universe
Figure 29.26 Analogy for Inflation. During a period of rapid inflation, a curved balloon grows so large that to any local observer it
looks flat. The inset shows the geometry from the ant’s point of view.
Grand Unified Theories
While inflation is an intriguing idea and widely accepted by researchers, we cannot directly observe events so
early in the universe. The conditions at the time of inflation were so extreme that we cannot reproduce them
in our laboratories or high-energy accelerators, but scientists have some ideas about what the universe might
have been like. These ideas are called grand unified theories or GUTs.
In GUT models, the forces that we are familiar with here on Earth, including gravity and electromagnetism,
behaved very differently in the extreme conditions of the early universe than they do today. In physical
science, the term force is used to describe anything that can change the motion of a particle or body. One of
the remarkable discoveries of modern science is that all known physical processes can be described through
the action of just four forces: gravity, electromagnetism, the strong nuclear force, and the weak nuclear force
(Table 29.3).
The Forces of Nature
Force
Relative Strength
Today
Range of
Action
Important Applications
Gravity
Whole
universe
Motions of planets, stars, galaxies
Electromagnetism
Whole
universe
Atoms, molecules, electricity, magnetic
fields
Weak nuclear
force
10–17 meters
Radioactive decay
Strong nuclear
force
10–15 meters
The existence of atomic nuclei
Table 29.3
Gravity is perhaps the most familiar force, and certainly appears strong if you jump off a tall building.
However, the force of gravity between two elementary particles—say two protons—is by far the weakest of the
four forces. Electromagnetism—which includes both magnetic and electrical forces, holds atoms together, and
29 • The Big Bang
produces the electromagnetic radiation that we use to study the universe—is much stronger, as you can see in
Table 29.3. The weak nuclear force is only weak in comparison to its strong “cousin,” but it is in fact much
stronger than gravity.
Both the weak and strong nuclear forces differ from the first two forces in that they act only over very small
distances—those comparable to the size of an atomic nucleus or less. The weak force is involved in radioactive
decay and in reactions that result in the production of neutrinos. The strong force holds protons and neutrons
together in an atomic nucleus.
Physicists have wondered why there are four forces in the universe—why not 300 or, preferably, just one? An
important hint comes from the name electromagnetic force. For a long time, scientists thought that the forces
of electricity and magnetism were separate, but James Clerk Maxwell (see the chapter on Radiation and
Spectra) was able to unify these forces—to show that they are aspects of the same phenomenon. In the same
way, many scientists (including Einstein) have wondered if the four forces we now know could also be unified.
Physicists have actually developed GUTs that unify three of the four forces (but not gravity).
In these theories, the strong, weak, and electromagnetic forces are not three independent forces but instead
are different manifestations or aspects of what is, in fact, a single force. The theories predict that at high
enough temperatures, there would be only one force. At lower temperatures (like the ones in the universe
today), however, this single force has changed into three different forces (Figure 29.27). Just as different gases
or liquids freeze at different temperatures, we can say that the different forces “froze out” of the unified force
at different temperatures. Unfortunately, the temperatures at which the three forces acted as one force are so
high that they cannot be reached in any laboratory on Earth. Only the early universe, at times prior to 10–35
second, was hot enough to unify these forces.
Figure 29.27 Four Forces That Govern the Universe. The behavior of the four forces depends on the temperature of the universe.
This diagram (inspired by some grand unified theories) shows that at very early times when the temperature of the universe was
very high, all four forces resembled one another and were indistinguishable. As the universe cooled, the forces took on separate and
distinctive characteristics.
Many physicists think that gravity was also unified with the three other forces at still higher temperatures, and
scientists have tried to develop a theory that combines all four forces. For example, in string theory, the pointlike particles of matter that we have discussed in this book are replaced by one-dimensional objects called
strings. In this theory, infinitesimal strings, which have length but not height or width, are the building blocks
used to construct all the forms of matter and energy in the universe. These strings exist in 11-dimensional
space (not the 4-dimensional spacetime with which we are familiar). The strings vibrate in the various
29.6 • The Inflationary Universe
dimensions, and depending on how they vibrate, they are seen in our world as matter or gravity or light. As
you can imagine, the mathematics of string theory is very complex, and the theory remains untested by
experiments. Even the largest particle accelerators on Earth do not achieve high enough energy to show
whether string theory applies to the real world.
String theory is interesting to scientists because it is currently the only approach that seems to have the
potential of combining all four forces to produce what physicists have termed the Theory of Everything.3
Theories of the earliest phases of the universe must take both quantum mechanics and gravity into account,
but at the simplest level, gravity and quantum mechanics are incompatible. General relativity, our best theory
of gravity, says that the motions of objects can be predicted exactly. Quantum mechanics says you can only
calculate the probability (chance) that an object will do something. String theory is an attempt to resolve this
paradox. The mathematics that underpins string theory is elegant and beautiful, but it remains to be seen
whether it will make predictions that can be tested by observations in yet-to-be-developed, high-energy
accelerators on Earth or by observations of the early universe.
The earliest period in the history of the universe from time zero to 10–43 second is called the Planck time. The
universe was unimaginably hot and dense, and theorists believe that at this time, quantum effects of gravity
dominated physical interactions—and, as we have just discussed, we have no tested theory of quantum
gravity. Inflation is hypothesized to have occurred somewhat later, when the universe was between perhaps
10–35 and 10–33 second old and the temperature was 1027 to 1028 K. This rapid expansion took place when three
forces (electromagnetic, strong, and weak) are thought to have been unified, and this is when GUTs are
applicable.
After inflation, the universe continued to expand (but more slowly) and to cool. An important milestone was
reached when the temperature was down to 1015 K and the universe was 10–10 second old. Under these
conditions, all four forces were separate and distinct. High-energy particle accelerators can achieve similar
conditions, and so theories of the history of the universe from this point on have a sound basis in experiments.
As yet, we have no direct evidence of what the conditions were during the inflationary epoch, and the ideas
presented here are speculative. Researchers are trying to devise some experimental tests. For example, the
quantum fluctuations in the very early universe would have caused variations in density and produced
gravitational waves that may have left a detectable imprint on the CMB. Detection of such an imprint will
require observations with equipment whose sensitivity is improved from what we have today. Ultimately,
however, it may provide confirmation that we live in a universe that once experienced an epoch of rapid
inflation.
If you are typical of the students who read this book, you may have found this brief discussion of dark matter,
inflation, and cosmology a bit frustrating. We have offered glimpses of theories and observations, but have
raised more questions than we have answered. What is dark matter? What is dark energy? Inflation explains
the observations of flatness and uniformity of the university, but did it actually happen? These ideas are at the
forefront of modern science, where progress almost always leads to new puzzles, and much more work is
needed before we can see clearly. Bear in mind that less than a century has passed since Hubble
demonstrated the existence of other galaxies. The quest to understand just how the universe of galaxies came
to be will keep astronomers busy for a long time to come.
29.7
The Anthropic Principle
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Name some properties of the universe that, if different, would have precluded the development of
humans
This name became the title of a film about physicist Stephen Hawking in 2014.
29 • The Big Bang
Despite our uncertainties, we must admit that the picture we have developed about the evolution of our
universe is a remarkable one. With new telescopes, we have begun to collect enough observational evidence
that we can describe how the universe evolved from a mere fraction of a second after the expansion began.
Although this is an impressive achievement, there are still some characteristics of the universe that we cannot
explain. And yet, it turns out that if these characteristics were any different, we would not be here to ask about
them. Let’s look at some of these “lucky accidents,” beginning with the observations of the cosmic microwave
background (CMB).
Lucky Accidents
As we described in this chapter, the CMB is radiation that was emitted when the universe was a few hundred
thousand years old. Observations show that the temperature of the radiation varies from one region to
another, typically by about 10 millionths of a degree, and these temperature differences signal small
differences in density. But suppose the tiny, early fluctuations in density had been much smaller. Then
calculations show that the pull of gravity near them would have been so small that no galaxies would ever
have formed.
What if the fluctuations in density had been much larger? Then it is possible that very dense regions would
have condensed, and these would simply have collapsed directly to black holes without ever forming galaxies
and stars. Even if galaxies had been able to form in such a universe, space would have been filled with intense
X-rays and gamma rays, and it would have been difficult for life forms to develop and survive. The density of
stars within galaxies would be so high that interactions and collisions among them would be frequent. In such
a universe, any planetary systems could rarely survive long enough for life to develop.
So for us to be here, the density fluctuations need to be “just right”—not too big and not too small.
Another lucky accident is that the universe is finely balanced between expansion and contraction. It is
expanding, but very slowly. If the expansion had been at a much higher rate, all of the matter would have
thinned out before galaxies could form. If everything were expanding at a much slower rate, then gravity
would have “won.” The expansion would have reversed and all of the matter would have recollapsed, probably
into a black hole—again, no stars, no planets, no life.
The development of life on Earth depends on still-luckier coincidences. Had matter and antimatter been
present initially in exactly equal proportions, then all matter would have been annihilated and turned into pure
energy. We owe our existence to the fact that there was slightly more matter than antimatter. (After most of
the matter made contact with an equal amount of antimatter, turning into energy, a small amount of
additional matter must have been present. We are all descendants of that bit of “unbalanced” matter.)
If nuclear fusion reactions occurred at a somewhat faster rate than they actually do, then at the time of the
initial fireball, all of the matter would have been converted from hydrogen into helium into carbon and all the
way into iron (the most stable nucleus). That would mean that no stars would have formed, since the existence
of stars depends on there being light elements that can undergo fusion in the main-sequence stage and make
the stars shine. In addition, the structure of atomic nuclei had to be just right to make it possible for three
helium atoms to come together easily to fuse carbon, which is the basis of life. If the triple-alpha process we
discussed in the chapter on Stars from Adolescence to Old Age were too unlikely, not enough carbon would
have formed to lead to biology as we know it. At the same time, it had to be hard enough to fuse carbon into
oxygen that a large amount of carbon survived for billions of years.
There are additional factors that have contributed to life like us being possible. Neutrinos have to interact with
matter at just the right, albeit infrequent, rate. Supernova explosions occur when neutrinos escape from the
cores of collapsing stars, deposit some of their energy in the surrounding stellar envelope, and cause it to
blow out and away into space. The heavy elements that are ejected in such explosions are essential
ingredients of life here on Earth. If neutrinos did not interact with matter at all, they would escape from the
cores of collapsing stars without causing the explosion. If neutrinos interacted strongly with matter, they
29.7 • The Anthropic Principle
would remain trapped in the stellar core. In either case, the heavy elements would remain locked up inside the
collapsing star.
If gravity were a much stronger force than it is, stars could form with much smaller masses, and their lifetimes
would be measured in years rather than billions of years. Chemical processes, on the other hand, would not be
sped up if gravity were a stronger force, and so there would be no time for life to develop while stars were so
short-lived. Even if life did develop in a stronger-gravity universe, life forms would have to be tiny or they could
not stand up or move around.
What Had to Be, Had to Be
In summary, we see that a specific set of rules and conditions in the universe has allowed complexity and life
on Earth to develop. As yet, we have no theory to explain why this “right” set of conditions occurred. For this
reason, many scientists are beginning to accept an idea we call the anthropic principle—namely, that the
physical laws we observe must be what they are precisely because these are the only laws that allow for the
existence of humans.
Some scientists speculate that our universe is but one of countless universes, each with a different set of
physical laws—an idea that is sometimes referred to as the multiverse. Some of those universes might be
stillborn, collapsing before any structure forms. Others may expand so quickly that they remain essentially
featureless with no stars and galaxies. In other words, there may be a much larger multiverse that contains
our own universe and many others. This multiverse (existing perhaps in more dimensions that we can become
aware of) is infinite and eternal; it generates many, many inflating regions, each of which evolves into a
separate universe, which may be completely unlike any of the other separate universes. Our universe is then
the way it is because it is the only way it could be and have humans like ourselves in it to discover its
properties and ask such questions.
View the 2011 introductory talk (https://openstax.org/l/30mulcosinfla) on the Multiverse and Cosmic
Inflation by Dr. Anthony Aguirre of the University of California, part of the Silicon Valley Astronomy Lecture
Series.
It is difficult to know how to test these ideas since we can never make contact with any other universe. For
most scientists, our discussion in this section borders on the philosophical and metaphysical. Perhaps in the
future our understanding of physics will develop to the point that we can know why the gravitational constant
is as strong as it is, why the universe is expanding at exactly the rate it is, and why all of the other “lucky
accidents” happened—why they were inevitable and could be no other way. Then this anthropic idea would no
longer be necessary. No one knows, however, whether we will ever have an explanation for why this universe
works the way it does.
We have come a long way in our voyage through the universe. We have learned a remarkable amount about
how and when the cosmos came to be, but the question of why the universe is the way it is remains as elusive
as ever.
LINK TO LEARNING
29 • The Big Bang
Key Terms
anthropic principle
idea that physical laws must be the way they are because otherwise we could not be
here to measure them
Big Bang
the theory of cosmology in which the expansion of the universe began with a primeval explosion
(of space, time, matter, and energy)
closed universe
a model in which the universe expands from a Big Bang, stops, and then contracts to a big
crunch
cosmic microwave background (CMB)
microwave radiation coming from all directions that is the redshifted
afterglow of the Big Bang
cosmological constant
the term in the equations of general relativity that represents a repulsive force in the
universe
cosmology
the study of the organization and evolution of the universe
critical density
in cosmology, the density that is just sufficient to bring the expansion of the universe to a
stop after infinite time
dark energy
the energy that is causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate; its existence is inferred
from observations of distant supernovae
dark matter
nonluminous material, whose nature we don’t yet understand, but whose presence can be
inferred because of its gravitational influence on luminous matter
deuterium
a form of hydrogen in which the nucleus of each atom consists of one proton and one neutron
flat universe
a model of the universe that has a critical density and in which the geometry of the universe is
flat, like a sheet of paper
fusion
the building of heavier atomic nuclei from lighter ones
grand unified theories
(GUTs) physical theories that attempt to describe the four forces of nature as
different manifestations of a single force
inflationary universe
a theory of cosmology in which the universe is assumed to have undergone a phase of
very rapid expansion when the universe was about 10–35 second old; after this period of rapid expansion,
the standard Big Bang and inflationary models are identical
lithium
the third element in the periodic table; lithium nuclei with three protons and four neutrons were
manufactured during the first few minutes of the expansion of the universe
multiverse
the speculative idea that our universe is just one of many universes, each with its own set of
physical laws
open universe
a model in which the density of the universe is not high enough to bring the expansion of the
universe to a halt
photon decoupling time
when radiation began to stream freely through the universe without interacting
with matter
weakly interacting massive particles
(WIMPs) weakly interacting massive particles are one of the
candidates for the composition of dark matter
Summary
29.1 The Age of the Universe
Cosmology is the study of the organization and evolution of the universe. The universe is expanding, and this
is one of the key observational starting points for modern cosmological theories. Modern observations show
that the rate of expansion has not been constant throughout the life of the universe. Initially, when galaxies
were close together, the effects of gravity were stronger than the effects of dark energy, and the expansion
rate gradually slowed. As galaxies moved farther apart, the influence of gravity on the expansion rate
weakened. Measurements of distant supernovae show that when the universe was about half its current age,
dark energy began to dominate the rate of expansion and caused it to speed up. In order to estimate the age
of the universe, we must allow for changes in the rate of expansion. After allowing for these effects,
29 • Key Terms
astronomers estimate that all of the matter within the observable universe was concentrated in an extremely
small volume 13.8 billion years ago, a time we call the Big Bang.
29.2 A Model of the Universe
For describing the large-scale properties of the universe, a model that is isotropic and homogeneous (same
everywhere) is a pretty good approximation of reality. The universe is expanding, which means that the
universe undergoes a change in scale with time; space stretches and distances grow larger by the same factor
everywhere at a given time. Observations show that the mass density of the universe is less than the critical
density. In other words, there is not enough matter in the universe to stop the expansion. With the discovery
of dark energy, which is accelerating the rate of expansion, the observational evidence is strong that the
universe will expand forever. Observations tell us that the expansion started about 13.8 billion years ago.
29.3 The Beginning of the Universe
Lemaître, Alpher, and Gamow first worked out the ideas that are today called the Big Bang theory. The
universe cools as it expands. The energy of photons is determined by their temperature, and calculations show
that in the hot, early universe, photons had so much energy that when they collided with one another, they
could produce material particles. As the universe expanded and cooled, protons and neutrons formed first,
then came electrons and positrons. Next, fusion reactions produced deuterium, helium, and lithium nuclei.
Measurements of the deuterium abundance in today’s universe show that the total amount of ordinary matter
in the universe is only about 5% of the critical density.
29.4 The Cosmic Microwave Background
When the universe became cool enough to form neutral hydrogen atoms, the universe became transparent to
radiation. Scientists have detected the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation from this time during
the hot, early universe. Measurements with the COBE satellite show that the CMB acts like a blackbody with a
temperature of 2.73 K. Tiny fluctuations in the CMB show us the seeds of large-scale structures in the universe.
Detailed measurements of these fluctuations show that we live in a critical-density universe and that the
critical density is composed of 31% matter, including dark matter, and 69% dark energy. Ordinary matter—the
kinds of elementary particles we find on Earth—make up only about 5% of the critical density. CMB
measurements also indicate that the universe is 13.8 billion years old.
29.5 What Is the Universe Really Made Of?
Twenty-seven percent of the critical density of the universe is composed of dark matter. To explain so much
dark matter, some physics theories predict that additional types of particles should exist. One type has been
given the name of WIMPs (weakly interacting massive particles), and scientists are now conducting
experiments to try to detect them in the laboratory. Dark matter plays an essential role in forming galaxies.
Since, by definition, these particles interact only very weakly (if at all) with radiation, they could have
congregated while the universe was still very hot and filled with radiation. They would thus have formed
gravitational traps that quickly attracted and concentrated ordinary matter after the universe became
transparent, and matter and radiation decoupled. This rapid concentration of matter enabled galaxies to form
by the time the universe was only 400–500 million years old.
29.6 The Inflationary Universe
The Big Bang model does not explain why the CMB has the same temperature in all directions. Neither does it
explain why the density of the universe is so close to critical density. These observations can be explained if
the universe experienced a period of rapid expansion, which scientists call inflation, about 10–35 second after
the Big Bang. New grand unified theories (GUTs) are being developed to describe physical processes in the
universe before and at the time that inflation occurred.
29 • Summary
29.7 The Anthropic Principle
Recently, many cosmologists have noted that the existence of humans depends on the fact that many
properties of the universe—the size of density fluctuations in the early universe, the strength of gravity, the
structure of atoms—were just right. The idea that physical laws must be the way they are because otherwise
we could not be here to measure them is called the anthropic principle. Some scientists speculate that there
may be a multiverse of universes, in which ours is just one.
For Further Exploration
Articles
The January 2021 issue of Astronomy magazine is devoted to our modern understanding of the beginning and
end of the universe.
Kruesi, L. “Cosmology: 5 Things You Need to Know.” Astronomy (May 2007): 28. Five questions students often
ask, and how modern cosmologists answer them.
Kruesi, L. “How Planck Has Redefined the Universe.” Astronomy (October 2013): 28. Good review of what this
space mission has told us about the CMB and the universe.
Lineweaver, C. & Davis, T. “Misconceptions about the Big Bang.” Scientific American (March 2005): 36. Some
basic ideas about modern cosmology clarified, using general relativity.
Nadis, S. “Sizing Up Inflation.” Sky & Telescope (November 2005): 32. Nice review of the origin and modern
variants on the inflationary idea.
Nadis, S. “How We Could See Another Universe.” Astronomy (June 2009): 24. On modern ideas about
multiverses and how such bubbles of space-time might collide.
Nadis, S. “Dark Energy’s New Face: How Exploding Stars Are Changing our View.” Astronomy (July 2012): 45.
About our improving understanding of the complexities of type Ia supernovae.
Naze, Y. “The Priest, the Universe, and the Big Bang.” Astronomy (November 2007): 40. On the life and work of
Georges Lemaître.
Panek, R. “Going Over to the Dark Side.” Sky & Telescope (February 2009): 22. A history of the observations
and theories about dark energy.
Pendrick, D. “Is the Big Bang in Trouble?” Astronomy (April 2009): 48. This sensationally titled article is really
more of a quick review of how modern ideas and observations are fleshing out the Big Bang hypothesis (and
raising questions.)
Reddy, F. “How the Universe Will End.” Astronomy (September 2014): 38. Brief discussion of local and general
future scenarios.
Riess, A. and Turner, M. “The Expanding Universe: From Slowdown to Speedup.” Scientific American
(September 2008): 62.
Turner, M. “The Origin of the Universe.” Scientific American (September 2009): 36. An introduction to modern
cosmology.
Websites
Cosmology Primer: https://preposterousuniverse.com/cosmologyprimer/ (https://preposterousuniverse.com/
cosmologyprimer/). Caltech Astrophysicist Sean Carroll offers a non-technical site with brief overviews of many
key topics in modern cosmology.
How Big Is the Universe?: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/space/how-big-universe.html (http://www.pbs.org/
29 • For Further Exploration
wgbh/nova/space/how-big-universe.html). A clear essay by a noted astronomer Brent Tully summarizes some
key ideas in cosmology and introduces the notion of the acceleration of the universe.
Universe 101: WMAP Mission Introduction to the Universe: http://map.gsfc.nasa.gov/universe/
(http://map.gsfc.nasa.gov/universe/). Concise NASA primer on cosmological ideas from the WMAP mission
team.
Cosmic Times Project: http://cosmictimes.gsfc.nasa.gov/ (http://cosmictimes.gsfc.nasa.gov/). James Lochner
and Barbara Mattson have compiled a rich resource of twentieth-century cosmology history in the form of
news reports on key events, from NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center.
Videos
The Day We Found the Universe: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HV23qWIieBw
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HV23qWIieBw). Distinguished science writer Marcia Bartusiak discusses
Hubble’s work and the discovery of the expansion of the cosmos.
Images of the Infant Universe: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x0AqCwElyUk (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=x0AqCwElyUk). Lloyd Knox’s public talk on the latest discoveries about the CMB and what they mean
for cosmology (1:16:00).
Runaway Universe: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kNYVFrnmcOU (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=kNYVFrnmcOU). Roger Blandford (Stanford Linear Accelerator Center) public lecture on the discovery
and meaning of cosmic acceleration and dark energy (1:08:08).
From the Big Bang to the Nobel Prize and on to the James Webb Space Telescope and the Discovery of Alien
Life: http://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/vis/a010000/a010300/a010370/index.html (http://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/vis/a010000/
a010300/a010370/index.html). John Mather, NASA Goddard (1:01:02). His Nobel Prize talk from Dec. 8, 2006 can
be found at http://www.nobelprize.org/mediaplayer/index.php?id=74&view=1 (http://www.nobelprize.org/
mediaplayer/index.php?id=74&view=1).
Supernovae and the Discovery of the Accelerating Universe: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_D6cwrl0CxA
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_D6cwrl0CxA). A public lecture by Nobel Laureate Adam Riess in 2019 (58
min).
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
This chapter deals with some pretty big questions and ideas. Some belief systems teach us that there are
questions to which “we were not meant to know” the answers. Other people feel that if our minds and
instruments are capable of exploring a question, then it becomes part of our birthright as thinking human
beings. Have your group discuss your personal reactions to discussing questions like the beginning of
time and space, and the ultimate fate of the universe. Does it make you nervous to hear about scientists
discussing these issues? Or is it exciting to know that we can now gather scientific evidence about the
origin and fate of the cosmos? (In discussing this, you may find that members of your group strongly
disagree; try to be respectful of others’ points of view.)
B.
A popular model of the universe in the 1950s and 1960s was the so-called steady-state cosmology. In this
model, the universe was not only the same everywhere and in all directions (homogeneous and isotropic),
but also the same at all times. We know the universe is expanding and the galaxies are thinning out, and
so this model hypothesized that new matter was continually coming into existence to fill in the space
between galaxies as they moved farther apart. If so, the infinite universe did not have to have a sudden
beginning, but could simply exist forever in a steady state. Have your group discuss your reaction to this
model. Do you find it more appealing philosophically than the Big Bang model? Can you cite some
evidence that indicates that the universe was not the same billions of years ago as it is now—that it is not
in a steady state?
29 • Collaborative Group Activities
C.
One of the lucky accidents that characterizes our universe is the fact that the time scale for the
development of intelligent life on Earth and the lifetime of the Sun are comparable. Have your group
discuss what would happen if the two time scales were very different. Suppose, for example, that the time
for intelligent life to evolve was 10 times greater than the main-sequence lifetime of the Sun. Would our
civilization have ever developed? Now suppose the time for intelligent life to evolve is ten times shorter
than the main-sequence lifetime of the Sun. Would we be around? (This latter discussion requires
considerable thought, including such ideas as what the early stages in the Sun’s life were like and how
much the early Earth was bombarded by asteroids and comets.)
D.
The grand ideas discussed in this chapter have a powerful effect on the human imagination, not just for
scientists, but also for artists, composers, dramatists, and writers. Here we list just a few of these
responses to cosmology. Each member of your group can select one of these, learn more about it, and
then report back, either to the group or to the whole class.
◦
The California poet Robinson Jeffers was the brother of an astronomer who worked at the Lick
Observatory. His poem “Margrave” is a meditation on cosmology and on the kidnap and murder of a
child: http://www.poemhunter.com/best-poems/robinson-jeffers/margrave/.
◦
In the science fiction story “The Gravity Mine” by Stephen Baxter, the energy of evaporating
supermassive black holes is the last hope of living beings in the far future in an ever-expanding
universe. The story has poetic description of the ultimate fate of matter and life and is available online
at: http://www.infinityplus.co.uk/stories/gravitymine.htm.
◦
The musical piece YLEM by Karlheinz Stockhausen takes its title from the ancient Greek term for
primeval material revived by George Gamow. It tries to portray the oscillating universe in musical
terms. Players actually expand through the concert hall, just as the universe does, and then return and
expand again. See: http://www.karlheinzstockhausen.org/ylem_english.htm.
◦
The musical piece Supernova Sonata http://www.astro.uvic.ca/~alexhp/new/supernova_sonata.html by
Alex Parker and Melissa Graham is based on the characteristics of 241 type Ia supernova explosions,
the ones that have helped astronomers discover the acceleration of the expanding universe.
◦
Gregory Benford’s short story “The Final Now” envisions the end of an accelerating open universe, and
blends religious and scientific imagery in a very poetic way. Available free online at:
http://www.tor.com/stories/2010/03/the-final-now.
E.
When Einstein learned about Hubble’s work showing that the universe of galaxies is expanding, he called
his introduction of the cosmological constant into his general theory of relativity his “biggest blunder.”
Can your group think of other “big blunders” from the history of astronomy, where the thinking of
astronomers was too conservative and the universe turned out to be more complicated or required more
“outside-the-box” thinking?
Exercises
Review Questions
1. What are the basic observations about the universe that any theory of cosmology must explain?
2. Describe some possible futures for the universe that scientists have come up with. What property of the
universe determines which of these possibilities is the correct one?
3. What does the term Hubble time mean in cosmology, and what is the current best calculation for the
Hubble time?
4. Which formed first: hydrogen nuclei or hydrogen atoms? Explain the sequence of events that led to each.
5. Describe at least two characteristics of the universe that are explained by the standard Big Bang model.
29 • Exercises
6. Describe two properties of the universe that are not explained by the standard Big Bang model (without
inflation). How does inflation explain these two properties?
7. Why do astronomers believe there must be dark matter that is not in the form of atoms with protons and
neutrons?
8. What is dark energy and what evidence do astronomers have that it is an important component of the
universe?
9. Thinking about the ideas of space and time in Einstein’s general theory of relativity, how do we explain the
fact that all galaxies outside our Local Group show a redshift?
10. Astronomers have found that there is more helium in the universe than stars could have made in the 13.8
billion years that the universe has been in existence. How does the Big Bang scenario solve this problem?
11. Describe the anthropic principle. What are some properties of the universe that make it “ready” to have
life forms like you in it?
12. Describe the evidence that the expansion of the universe is accelerating.
Thought Questions
13. What is the most useful probe of the early evolution of the universe: a giant elliptical galaxy or an irregular
galaxy such as the Large Magellanic Cloud? Why?
14. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using quasars to probe the early history of the universe?
15. Would acceleration of the universe occur if it were composed entirely of matter (that is, if there were no
dark energy)?
16. Suppose the universe expands forever. Describe what will become of the radiation from the primeval
fireball. What will the future evolution of galaxies be like? Could life as we know it survive forever in such a
universe? Why?
17. Some theorists expected that observations would show that the density of matter in the universe is just
equal to the critical density. Do the current observations support this hypothesis?
18. There are a variety of ways of estimating the ages of various objects in the universe. Describe two of these
ways, and indicate how well they agree with one another and with the age of the universe itself as
estimated by its expansion.
19. Since the time of Copernicus, each revolution in astronomy has moved humans farther from the center of
the universe. Now it appears that we may not even be made of the most common form of matter. Trace
the changes in scientific thought about the central nature of Earth, the Sun, and our Galaxy on a cosmic
scale. Explain how the notion that most of the universe is made of dark matter continues this “Copernican
tradition.”
20. The anthropic principle suggests that in some sense we are observing a special kind of universe; if the
universe were different, we could never have come to exist. Comment on how this fits with the Copernican
tradition described in Exercise 29.19.
21. Penzias and Wilson’s discovery of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) is a nice example of scientific
serendipity—something that is found by chance but turns out to have a positive outcome. What were they
looking for and what did they discover?
22. Construct a timeline for the universe and indicate when various significant events occurred, from the
beginning of the expansion to the formation of the Sun to the appearance of humans on Earth.
29 • Exercises
Figuring for Yourself
23. Suppose the Hubble constant were not 22 but 33 km/s per million light-years. Then what would the critical
density be?
24. Assume that the average galaxy contains 1011 MSun and that the average distance between galaxies is 10
million light-years. Calculate the average density of matter (mass per unit volume) in galaxies. What
fraction is this of the critical density we calculated in the chapter?
25. The CMB contains roughly 400 million photons per m3. The energy of each photon depends on its
wavelength. Calculate the typical wavelength of a CMB photon. Hint: The CMB is blackbody radiation at a
temperature of 2.73 K. According to Wien’s law, the peak wave length in nanometers is given by
Calculate the wavelength at which the CMB is a maximum and, to make the units
consistent, convert this wavelength from nanometers to meters.
26. Following up on Exercise 29.25 calculate the energy of a typical photon. Assume for this approximate
calculation that each photon has the wavelength calculated in Exercise 29.25. The energy of a photon is
given by
where h is Planck’s constant and is equal to 6.626 × 10–34 J × s, c is the speed of light in
m/s, and λ is the wavelength in m.
27. Continuing the thinking in Exercise 29.25 and Exercise 29.26, calculate the energy in a cubic meter of
space, multiply the energy per photon calculated in Exercise 29.26 by the number of photons per cubic
meter given above.
28. Continuing the thinking in the last three exercises, convert this energy to an equivalent in mass, use
Einstein’s equation E = mc2. Hint: Divide the energy per m3 calculated in Exercise 29.27 by the speed of
light squared. Check your units; you should have an answer in kg/m3. Now compare this answer with the
critical density. Your answer should be several powers of 10 smaller than the critical density. In other
words, you have found for yourself that the contribution of the CMB photons to the overall density of the
universe is much, much smaller than the contribution made by stars and galaxies.
29. There is still some uncertainty in the Hubble constant. (a) Current estimates range from about 19.9 km/s
per million light-years to 23 km/s per million light-years. Assume that the Hubble constant has been
constant since the Big Bang. What is the possible range in the ages of the universe? Use the equation in
the text,
and make sure you use consistent units. (b) Twenty years ago, estimates for the Hubble
constant ranged from 50 to 100 km/s per Mps. What are the possible ages for the universe from those
values? Can you rule out some of these possibilities on the basis of other evidence?
30. It is possible to derive the age of the universe given the value of the Hubble constant and the distance to a
galaxy, again with the assumption that the value of the Hubble constant has not changed since the Big
Bang. Consider a galaxy at a distance of 400 million light-years receding from us at a velocity, v. If the
Hubble constant is 20 km/s per million light-years, what is its velocity? How long ago was that galaxy right
next door to our own Galaxy if it has always been receding at its present rate? Express your answer in
years. Since the universe began when all galaxies were very close together, this number is a rough
estimate for the age of the universe.
29 • Exercises
29 • Exercises
