Figure 30.1 Astrobiology: The Road to Life in the Universe. In this fanciful montage produced by a NASA artist, we see one
roadmap for discovering life in the universe. Learning more about the origin, evolution, and properties of life on Earth aids us in
searching for evidence of life beyond our planet. Our neighbor world, Mars, had warmer, wetter conditions billions of years ago that
might have helped life there begin. Farther out, Jupiter’s moon Europa represents the icy moons of the outer solar system. Beneath
their shells of solid ice may lie vast oceans of liquid water that could support biology. Beyond our solar system are stars that host
their own planets, some of which might be similar to Earth in the ability to support liquid water—and a thriving biosphere—at the
planet’s surface. Research is pushing actively in all these directions with the goal of proving a scientific answer to the question, “Are
we alone?” (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Chapter Outline
30.1 The Cosmic Context for Life
30.2 Astrobiology
30.3 Searching for Life beyond Earth
30.4 The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
Thinking Ahead
As we have learned more about the universe, we have naturally wondered whether there might be other
forms of life out there. The ancient question, “Are we alone in the universe?” connects us to generations of
humans before us. While in the past, this question was in the realm of philosophy or science fiction, today we
have the means to seek an answer through scientific inquiry. In this chapter, we will consider how life began
on Earth, whether the same processes could have led to life on other worlds, and how we might seek evidence
of life elsewhere. This is the science of astrobiology.
The search for life on other planets is not the same as the search for intelligent life, which (if it exists) is surely
much rarer. Learning more about the origin, evolution, and properties of life on Earth aids us in searching for
evidence of all kinds of life beyond that on our planet.
Life in the Universe
30 • Thinking Ahead
30.1
The Cosmic Context for Life
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the chemical and environmental conditions that make Earth hospitable to life
Discuss the assumption underlying the Copernican principle and outline its implications for modern-day
astronomers
Understand the questions underlying the Fermi paradox
We saw that the universe was born in the Big Bang about 14 billion years ago. After the initial hot, dense
fireball of creation cooled sufficiently for atoms to exist, all matter consisted of hydrogen and helium (with a
very small amount of lithium). As the universe aged, processes within stars created the other elements,
including those that make up Earth (such as iron, silicon, magnesium, and oxygen) and those required for life
as we know it, such as carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen. These and other elements combined in space to produce
a wide variety of compounds that form the basis of life on Earth. In particular, life on Earth is based on the
presence of a key unit known as an organic molecule, a molecule that contains carbon. Especially important
are the hydrocarbons, chemical compounds made up entirely of hydrogen and carbon, which serve as the
basis for our biological chemistry, or biochemistry. While we do not understand the details of how life on Earth
began, it is clear that to make creatures like us possible, events like the ones we described must have
occurred, resulting in what is called the chemical evolution of the universe.
What Made Earth Hospitable to Life?
About 5 billion years ago, a cloud of gas and dust in this cosmic neighborhood began to collapse under its own
weight. Out of this cloud formed the Sun and its planets, together with all the smaller bodies, such as comets,
that also orbit the Sun (Figure 30.2). The third planet from the Sun, as it cooled, eventually allowed the
formation of large quantities of liquid water on its surface.
Figure 30.2 Comet Hyakutake. This image was captured in 1996 by NASA photographer Bill Ingalls. Comet impacts can deliver both
water and a variety of interesting chemicals, including some organic chemicals, to Earth. (credit: NASA/Bill Ingalls)
The chemical variety and moderate conditions on Earth eventually led to the formation of molecules that could
make copies of themselves (reproduce), which is essential for beginning life. Over the billions of years of Earth
history, life evolved and became more complex. The course of evolution was punctuated by occasional planetwide changes caused by collisions with some of the smaller bodies that did not make it into the Sun or one of
its accompanying worlds. As we saw in the chapter on Earth as a Planet, mammals may owe their domination
of Earth’s surface to just such a collision 65 million years ago, which led to the extinction of the dinosaurs
(along with the majority of other living things). The details of such mass extinctions are currently the focus of a
great deal of scientific interest.
Through many twisting turns, the course of evolution on Earth produced a creature with self-consciousness,
30 • Life in the Universe
able to ask questions about its own origins and place in the cosmos (Figure 30.3). Like most of Earth, this
creature is composed of atoms that were forged in earlier generations of stars—in this case, assembled into
both its body and brain. We might say that through the thoughts of human beings, the matter in the universe
can become aware of itself.
Figure 30.3 Young Human. Human beings have the intellect to wonder about their planet and what lies beyond it. Through them
(and perhaps other intelligent life), the universe becomes aware of itself. (credit: Andrew Fraknoi)
Think about those atoms in your body for a minute. They are merely on loan to you from the lending library of
atoms that make up our local corner of the universe. Atoms of many kinds circulate through your body and
then leave it—with each breath you inhale and exhale and the food you eat and excrete. Even the atoms that
take up more permanent residence in your tissues will not be part of you much longer than you are alive.
Ultimately, you will return your atoms to the vast reservoir of Earth, where they will be incorporated into other
structures and even other living things in the millennia to come.
This picture of cosmic evolution, of our descent from the stars, has been obtained through the efforts of
scientists in many fields over many decades. Some of its details are still tentative and incomplete, but we feel
reasonably confident in its broad outlines. It is remarkable how much we have been able to learn in the short
time we have had the instruments to probe the physical nature of the universe.
The Copernican Principle
Our study of astronomy has taught us that we have always been wrong in the past whenever we have claimed
that Earth is somehow unique. Galileo, using the newly invented technology of the telescope, showed us that
Earth is not the center of the solar system, but merely one of a number of objects orbiting the Sun. Our study
of the stars has demonstrated that the Sun itself is a rather undistinguished star, halfway through its long
main-sequence stage like so many billions of others. There seems nothing special about our position in the
Milky Way Galaxy either, and nothing surprising about our Galaxy’s position in either its own group or its
supercluster.
The discovery of planets around other stars confirms our idea that the formation of planets is a natural
consequence of the formation of stars. We have identified thousands of exoplanets—planets orbiting around
other stars, from huge ones orbiting close to their stars (informally called “hot Jupiters”) down to planets
smaller than Earth. A steady stream of exoplanet discoveries is leading to the conclusion that earthlike planets
occur frequently—enough that there are likely many billions of “exo-Earths” in our own Milky Way Galaxy
alone. From a planetary perspective, Earth-size planets are not unusual.
Philosophers of science sometimes call the idea that there is nothing special about our place in the universe
the Copernican principle. Given all of the above, most scientists would be surprised if life were limited to our
planet and had started nowhere else. There are billions of stars in our Galaxy old enough for life to have
developed on a planet around them, and there are billions of other galaxies as well. Astronomers and
30.1 • The Cosmic Context for Life
biologists have long conjectured that a series of events similar to those on the early Earth probably led to
living organisms on many planets around other stars, and possibly even on other planets in our solar system,
such as Mars.
The real scientific issue (which we do not currently know the answer to) is whether organic biochemistry is
likely or unlikely in the universe at large. Are we a fortunate and exceedingly rare outcome of chemical
evolution, or is organic biochemistry a regular part of the chemical evolution of the cosmos? We do not yet
know the answer to this question, but data, even an exceedingly small amount (like finding “unrelated to us”
living systems on a world like Europa), will help us arrive at it.
So Where Are They?
If the Copernican principle is applied to life, then biology may be rather common among planets. Taken to its
logical limit, the Copernican principle also suggests that intelligent life like us might be common. Intelligence
like ours has some very special properties, including an ability to make progress through the application of
technology. Organic life around other (older) stars may have started a billion years earlier than we did on
Earth, so they may have had a lot more time to develop advanced technology such as sending information,
probes, or even life-forms between stars.
Faced with such a prospect, physicist Enrico Fermi asked a question several decades ago that is now called the
Fermi paradox: where are they? If life and intelligence are common and have such tremendous capacity for
growth, why is there not a network of galactic civilizations whose presence extends even into a “latecomer”
planetary system like ours?
Several solutions have been suggested to the Fermi paradox. Perhaps life is common but intelligence (or at
least technological civilization) is rare. Perhaps such a network will come about in the future but has not yet
had the time to develop. Maybe there are invisible streams of data flowing past us all the time that we are not
advanced enough or sensitive enough to detect. Maybe advanced species make it a practice not to interfere
with immature, developing consciousness such as our own. Or perhaps civilizations that reach a certain level
of technology then self-destruct, meaning there are no other civilizations now existing in our Galaxy. We do
not yet know whether any advanced life is out there and, if it is, why we are not aware of it. Still, you might
want to keep these issues in mind as you read the rest of this chapter.
Is there a network of galactic civilizations beyond our solar system? If so, why can’t we see them? Explore
the possibilities in the cartoon video (https://openstax.org/l/30fermparadox) “The Fermi Paradox—Where
Are All the Aliens?”
30.2
Astrobiology
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the chemical building blocks required for life
Describe the molecular systems and processes driving the origin and evolution of life
Describe the characteristics of a habitable environment
Describe some of the extreme conditions on Earth, and explain how certain organisms have adapted to
these conditions
Scientists today take a multidisciplinary approach to studying the origin, evolution, distribution, and ultimate
fate of life in the universe; this field of study is known as astrobiology. You may also sometimes hear this field
LINK TO LEARNING
30 • Life in the Universe
referred to as exobiology or bioastronomy. Astrobiology brings together astronomers, planetary scientists,
chemists, geologists, and biologists (among others) to work on the same problems from their various
perspectives.
Among the issues that astrobiologists explore are the conditions in which life arose on Earth and the reasons
for the extraordinary adaptability of life on our planet. They are also involved in identifying habitable worlds
beyond Earth and in trying to understand in practical terms how to look for life on those worlds. Let’s look at
some of these issues in more detail.
The Building Blocks of Life
While no unambiguous evidence for life has yet been found anywhere beyond Earth, life’s chemical building
blocks have been detected in a wide range of extraterrestrial environments. Meteorites (which you learned
about in Cosmic Samples and the Origin of the Solar System) have been found to contain two kinds of
substances whose chemical structures mark them as having an extraterrestrial origin—amino acids and
sugars. Amino acids are organic compounds that are the molecular building blocks of proteins. Proteins are
key biological molecules that provide the structure and function of the body’s tissues and organs and
essentially carry out the “work” of the cell. When we examine the gas and dust around comets, we also find a
number of organic molecules—compounds that on Earth are associated with the chemistry of life.
Expanding beyond our solar system, one of the most interesting results of modern radio astronomy has been
the discovery of organic molecules in giant clouds of gas and dust between stars. More than 100 different
molecules have been identified in these reservoirs of cosmic raw material, including formaldehyde, alcohol,
and others we know as important stepping stones in the development of life on Earth. Using radio telescopes
and radio spectrometers, astronomers can measure the abundances of various chemicals in these clouds. We
find organic molecules most readily in regions where the interstellar dust is most abundant, and it turns out
these are precisely the regions where star formation (and probably planet formation) happen most easily
(Figure 30.4).
Figure 30.4 Cloud of Gas and Dust. This cloud of gas and dust in the constellation of Scorpius is the sort of region where complex
molecules are found. It is also the sort of cloud where new stars form from the reservoir of gas and dust in the cloud. Radiation from
a group of hot stars (off the picture to the bottom left) called the Scorpius OB Association is “eating into” the cloud, sweeping it into
an elongated shape and causing the reddish glow seen at its tip. (credit: Dr. Robert Gendler)
Clearly the early Earth itself produced some of the molecular building blocks of life. Since the early 1950s,
scientists have tried to duplicate in their laboratories the chemical pathways that led to life on our planet. In a
series of experiments known as the Miller-Urey experiments, pioneered by Stanley Miller and Harold Urey at
30.2 • Astrobiology
the University of Chicago, biochemists have simulated conditions on early Earth and have been able to
produce some of the fundamental building blocks of life, including those that form proteins and other large
biological molecules known as nucleic acids (which we will discuss shortly).
Although these experiments produced encouraging results, there are some problems with them. The most
interesting chemistry from a biological perspective takes place with hydrogen-rich or reducing gases, such as
ammonia and methane. However, the early atmosphere of Earth was probably dominated by carbon dioxide
(as Venus’ and Mars’ atmospheres still are today) and may not have contained an abundance of reducing
gases comparable to that used in Miller-Urey type experiments. Hydrothermal vents—seafloor systems in
which ocean water is superheated and circulated through crustal or mantle rocks before reemerging into the
ocean—have also been suggested as potential contributors of organic compounds on the early Earth, and
such sources would not require Earth to have an early reducing atmosphere.
Both earthly and extraterrestrial sources may have contributed to Earth’s early supply of organic molecules,
although we have more direct evidence for the latter. It is even conceivable that life itself originated elsewhere
and was seeded onto our planet—although this, of course, does not solve the problem of how that life
originated to begin with.
Hydrothermal vents are beginning to seem more likely as early contributors to the organic compounds
found on Earth. Read about hydrothermal vents and watch videos and slideshows on these and other deepsea wonders at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (https://openstax.org/l/30wohooceins) website.
Try an interactive simulation of hydrothermal-vent circulation at the Dive and Discover
(https://openstax.org/l/30divediscover) website.
The Origin and Early Evolution of Life
The carbon compounds that form the chemical basis of life may be common in the universe, but it is still a
giant step from these building blocks to a living cell. Even the simplest molecules of the genes (the basic
functional units that carry the genetic, or hereditary, material in a cell) contain millions of molecular units,
each arranged in a precise sequence. Furthermore, even the most primitive life required two special
capabilities: a means of extracting energy from its environment, and a means of encoding and replicating
information in order to make faithful copies of itself. Biologists today can see ways that either of these
capabilities might have formed in a natural environment, but we are still a long way from knowing how the
two came together in the first life-forms.
We have no solid evidence for the pathway that led to the origin of life on our planet except for whatever early
history may be retained in the biochemistry of modern life. Indeed, we have very little direct evidence of what
Earth itself was like during its earliest history—our planet is so effective at resurfacing itself through plate
tectonics (see the chapter on Earth as a Planet) that very few rocks remain from this early period. In the earlier
chapter on Cratered Worlds, you learned that Earth was subjected to a heavy bombardment—a period of large
impact events—some 3.8 to 4.1 billion years ago. Large impacts would have been energetic enough to heatsterilize the surface layers of Earth, so that even if life had begun by this time, it might well have been wiped
out.
When the large impacts ceased, the scene was set for a more peaceful environment on our planet. If the
oceans of Earth contained accumulated organic material from any of the sources already mentioned, the
ingredients were available to make living organisms. We do not understand in any detail the sequence of
events that led from molecules to biology, but there is fossil evidence of microbial life in 3.5-billion-year-old
LINK TO LEARNING
30 • Life in the Universe
rocks, and possible (debated) evidence for life as far back as 3.8 billion years.
Life as we know it employs two main molecular systems: the functional molecules known as proteins, which
carry out the chemical work of the cell, and information-containing molecules of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
that store information about how to create the cell and its chemical and structural components. The origin of
life is sometimes considered a “chicken and egg problem” because, in modern biology, neither of these
systems works without the other. It is our proteins that assemble DNA strands in the precise order required to
store information, but the proteins are created based on information stored in DNA. Which came first? Some
origin of life researchers believe that prebiotic chemistry was based on molecules that could both store
information and do the chemical work of the cell. It has been suggested that RNA (ribonucleic acid), a
molecule that aids in the flow of genetic information from DNA to proteins, might have served such a purpose.
The idea of an early “RNA world” has become increasingly accepted, but a great deal remains to be
understood about the origin of life.
Perhaps the most important innovation in the history of biology, apart from the origin of life itself, was the
discovery of the process of photosynthesis, the complex sequence of chemical reactions through which some
living things can use sunlight to manufacture products that store energy (such as carbohydrates), releasing
oxygen as one by-product. Previously, life had to make do with sources of chemical energy available on Earth
or delivered from space. But the abundant energy available in sunlight could support a larger and more
productive biosphere, as well as some biochemical reactions not previously possible for life. One of these was
the production of oxygen (as a waste product) from carbon dioxide, and the increase in atmospheric levels of
oxygen about 2.4 billion years ago means that oxygen-producing photosynthesis must have emerged and
become globally important by this time. In fact, it is likely that oxygen-producing photosynthesis emerged
considerably earlier.
Some forms of chemical evidence contained in ancient rocks, such as the solid, layered rock formations known
as stromatolites, are thought to be the fossils of oxygen-producing photosynthetic bacteria in rocks that are
almost 3.5 billion years old (Figure 30.5). It is generally thought that a simpler form of photosynthesis that
does not produce oxygen (and is still used by some bacteria today) probably preceded oxygen-producing
photosynthesis, and there is strong fossil evidence that one or the other type of photosynthesis was
functioning on Earth at least as far back as 3.4 billion years ago.
Figure 30.5 Stromatolites Preserve the Earliest Physical Representation of Life on Earth. In their reach for sunlight, the singlecelled microbes formed mats that trapped sediments in the water above them. Such trapped sediments fell and formed layers on
top of the mats. The microbes then climbed atop the sediment layers and trapped more sediment. What is found in the rock record
are (a) the solidified, curved sedimentary layers that are signatures of biological activity. The earliest known stromatolite is 3.47
billion years old and is found in Western Australia. (b) This more recent example is in Lake Thetis, also in Western Australia. (credit a:
modification of work by James St. John; credit b: modification of work by Ruth Ellison)
The free oxygen produced by photosynthesis began accumulating in our atmosphere about 2.4 billion years
ago. The interaction of sunlight with oxygen can produce ozone (which has three atoms of oxygen per
molecule, as compared to the two atoms per molecule in the oxygen we breathe), which accumulated in a
30.2 • Astrobiology
layer high in Earth’s atmosphere. As it does on Earth today, this ozone provided protection from the Sun’s
damaging ultraviolet radiation. This allowed life to colonize the landmasses of our planet instead of remaining
only in the ocean.
The rise in oxygen levels was deadly to some microbes because, as a highly reactive chemical, it can
irreversibly damage some of the biomolecules that early life had developed in the absence of oxygen. For
other microbes, it was a boon: combining oxygen with organic matter or other reduced chemicals generates a
lot of energy—you can see this when a log burns, for example—and many forms of life adopted this way of
living. This new energy source made possible a great proliferation of organisms, which continued to evolve in
an oxygen-rich environment.
The details of that evolution are properly the subject of biology courses, but the process of evolution by
natural selection (survival of the fittest) provides a clear explanation for the development of Earth’s
remarkable variety of life-forms. It does not, however, directly solve the mystery of life’s earliest beginnings.
We hypothesize that life will arise whenever conditions are appropriate, but this hypothesis is just another
form of the Copernican principle. We now have the potential to address this hypothesis with observations. If a
second example of life is found in our solar system or a nearby star, it would imply that life emerges
commonly enough that the universe is likely filled with biology. To make such observations, however, we must
first decide where to focus our search.
Just how did life arise in the first place? And could it have happened with a different type of chemistry?
Watch the 15-minute video Making Matter Come Alive (https://openstax.org/l/30makmattcomali) in which a
chemistry expert explores some answers to these questions, from a 2011 TED Talk.
Habitable Environments
Among the staggering number of objects in our solar system, Galaxy, and universe, some may have conditions
suitable for life, while others do not. Understanding what conditions and features make a habitable
environment—an environment capable of hosting life—is important both for understanding how widespread
habitable environments may be in the universe and for focusing a search for life beyond Earth. Here, we
discuss habitability from the perspective of the life we know. We will explore the basic requirements of life and,
in the following section, consider the full range of environmental conditions on Earth where life is found. While
we can’t entirely rule out the possibility that other life-forms might have biochemistry based on alternatives to
carbon and liquid water, such life “as we don’t know it” is still completely speculative. In our discussion here,
we are focusing on habitability for life that is chemically similar to that on Earth.
Life requires a solvent (a liquid in which chemicals can dissolve) that enables the construction of biomolecules
and the interactions between them. For life as we know it, that solvent is water, which has a variety of
properties that are critical to how our biochemistry works. Water is abundant in the universe, but life requires
that water be in liquid form (rather than ice or gas) in order to properly fill its role in biochemistry. That is the
case only within a certain range of temperatures and pressures—too high or too low in either variable, and
water takes the form of a solid or a gas. Identifying environments where water is present within the
appropriate range of temperature and pressure is thus an important first step in identifying habitable
environments. Indeed, a “follow the water” strategy has been, and continues to be, a key driver in the
exploration of planets both within and beyond our solar system.
Our biochemistry is based on molecules made of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur.
Carbon is at the core of organic chemistry. Its ability to form four bonds, both with itself and with the other
elements of life, allows for the formation of a vast number of potential molecules on which to base
LINK TO LEARNING
30 • Life in the Universe
biochemistry. The remaining elements contribute structure and chemical reactivity to our biomolecules, and
form the basis of many of the interactions among them. These “biogenic elements,” sometimes referred to
with the acronym CHNOPS (carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur), are the raw
materials from which life is assembled, and an accessible supply of them is a second requirement of
habitability.
As we learned in previous chapters on nuclear fusion and the life story of the stars, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen,
phosphorus, and sulfur are all formed by fusion within stars and then distributed out into their galaxy as those
stars die. But how they are distributed among the planets that form within a new star system, in what form,
and how chemical, physical, and geological processes on those planets cycle the elements into structures that
are accessible to biology, can have significant impacts on the distribution of life. In Earth’s oceans, for
example, the abundance of phytoplankton (simple organisms that are the base of the ocean food chain) in
surface waters can vary by a thousand-fold because the supply of nitrogen differs from place to place (Figure
30.6). Understanding what processes control the accessibility of elements at all scales is thus a critical part of
identifying habitable environments.
Figure 30.6 Chlorophyll Abundance. The abundance of chlorophyll (an indicator of photosynthetic bacteria and algae) varies by
almost a thousand-fold across the ocean basins. That variation is almost entirely due to the availability of nitrogen—one of the major
“biogenic elements” in forms that can be used by life. (credit: modification of work by NASA, Gene C. Feldman)
With these first two requirements, we have the elemental raw materials of life and a solvent in which to
assemble them into the complicated molecules that drive our biochemistry. But carrying out that assembly
and maintaining the complicated biochemical machinery of life takes energy. You fulfill your own requirement
for energy every time you eat food or take a breath, and you would not live for long if you failed to do either
on a regular basis. Life on Earth makes use of two main types of energy: for you, these are the oxygen in the
air you breathe and the organic molecules in your food. But life overall can use a much wider array of
chemicals and, while all animals require oxygen, many bacteria do not. One of the earliest known life
processes, which still operates in some modern microorganisms, combines hydrogen and carbon dioxide to
make methane, releasing energy in the process. There are microorganisms that “breathe” metals that would
be toxic to us, and even some that breathe in sulfur and breathe out sulfuric acid. Plants and photosynthetic
microorganisms have also evolved mechanisms to use the energy in light directly.
Water in the liquid phase, the biogenic elements, and energy are the fundamental requirements for
habitability. But are there additional environmental constraints? We consider this in the next section.
30.2 • Astrobiology
Figure 30.7 Grand Prismatic Spring in Yellowstone National Park. This hot spring, where water emerges from the bluish center at
temperatures near the local boiling point (about 92 ºC), supports a thriving array of microbial life. The green, yellow, and orange
colors around the edges come from thick “mats” of photosynthetic bacteria. In fact, their coloration in part demonstrates their use
of light energy—some wavelengths of incoming sunlight are selectively captured for energy; the rest are reflected back. Since it lacks
the captured wavelengths, this light is now different in color than the sunlight that illuminates it. The blue part of the spring has
temperatures too high to allow photosynthetic life (hence the lack of color except that supplied by water itself), but life is still
present. Here, at nearly boiling temperatures, bacteria use the chemical energy supplied by the combination of hydrogen and other
chemicals with oxygen. (credit: modification of work by Domenico Salvagnin)
Life in Extreme Conditions
At a chemical level, life consists of many types of molecules that interact with one another to carry out the
processes of life. In addition to water, elemental raw materials, and energy, life also needs an environment in
which those complicated molecules are stable (don’t break down before they can do their jobs) and their
interactions are possible. Your own biochemistry works properly only within a very narrow range of about 10
°C in body temperature and two-tenths of a unit in blood pH (pH is a numerical measure of acidity, or the
amount of free hydrogen ions). Beyond those limits, you are in serious danger.
Life overall must also have limits to the conditions in which it can properly work but, as we will see, they are
much broader than human limits. The resources that fuel life are distributed across a very wide range of
conditions. For example, there is abundant chemical energy to be had in hot springs that are essentially
boiling acid (see Figure 30.7). This provides ample incentive for evolution to fill as much of that range with life
as is biochemically possible. An organism (usually a microbe) that tolerates or even thrives under conditions
that most of the life around us would consider hostile, such as very high or low temperature or acidity, is
known as an extremophile (where the suffix -phile means “lover of”). Let’s have a look at some of the
conditions that can challenge life and the organisms that have managed to carve out a niche at the far reaches
of possibility.
Both high and low temperatures can cause a problem for life. As a large organism, you are able to maintain an
almost constant body temperature whether it is colder or warmer in the environment around you. But this is
not possible at the tiny size of microorganisms; whatever the temperature in the outside world is also the
temperature of the microbe, and its biochemistry must be able to function at that temperature. High
temperatures are the enemy of complexity—increasing thermal energy tends to break apart big molecules
into smaller and smaller bits, and life needs to stabilize the molecules with stronger bonds and special
proteins. But this approach has its limits.
Nevertheless, as noted earlier, high-temperature environments like hot springs and hydrothermal vents often
offer abundant sources of chemical energy and therefore drive the evolution of organisms that can tolerate
high temperatures (see Figure 30.8); such an organism is called a thermophile. Currently, the high
temperature record holder is a methane-producing microorganism that can grow at 122 °C, where the
pressure also is so high that water still does not boil. That’s amazing when you think about it. We cook our
30 • Life in the Universe
food—meaning, we alter the chemistry and structure of its biomolecules—by boiling it at a temperature of 100
°C. In fact, food begins to cook at much lower temperatures than this. And yet, there are organisms whose
biochemistry remains intact and operates just fine at temperatures 20 degrees higher.
Figure 30.8 Hydrothermal Vent on the Sea Floor. What appears to be black smoke is actually superheated water filled with
minerals of metal sulfide. Hydrothermal vent fluid can represent a rich source of chemical energy, and therefore a driver for the
evolution of microorganisms that can tolerate high temperatures. Bacteria feeding on this chemical energy form the base of a food
chain that can support thriving communities of animals—in this case, a dense patch of red and white tubeworms growing around
the base of the vent. (credit: modification of work by the University of Washington; NOAA/OAR/OER)
Cold can also be a problem, in part because it slows down metabolism to very low levels, but also because it
can cause physical changes in biomolecules. Cell membranes—the molecular envelopes that surround cells
and allow their exchange of chemicals with the world outside—are basically made of fatlike molecules. And
just as fat congeals when it cools, membranes crystallize, changing how they function in the exchange of
materials in and out of the cell. Some cold-adapted cells (called psychrophiles) have changed the chemical
composition of their membranes in order to cope with this problem; but again, there are limits. Thus far, the
coldest temperature at which any microbe has been shown to reproduce is about –25 ºC.
Conditions that are very acidic or alkaline can also be problematic for life because many of our important
molecules, like proteins and DNA, are broken down under such conditions. For example, household drain
cleaner, which does its job by breaking down the chemical structure of things like hair clogs, is a very alkaline
solution. The most acid-tolerant organisms (acidophiles) are capable of living at pH values near zero—about
ten million times more acidic than your blood (Figure 30.9). At the other extreme, some alkaliphiles can grow
at pH levels of about 13, which is comparable to the pH of household bleach and almost a million times more
alkaline than your blood.
30.2 • Astrobiology
Figure 30.9 Spain’s Rio Tinto. With a pH close to 2, Rio Tinto is literally a river of acid. Acid-loving microorganisms (acidophiles) not
only thrive in these waters, their metabolic activities help generate the acid in the first place. The rusty red color that gives the river
its name comes from high levels of iron dissolved in the waters.
High levels of salts in the environment can also cause a problem for life because the salt blocks some cellular
functions. Humans recognized this centuries ago and began to salt-cure food to keep it from
spoiling—meaning, to keep it from being colonized by microorganisms. Yet some microbes have evolved to
grow in water that is saturated in sodium chloride (table salt)—about ten times as salty as seawater (Figure
30.10).
Figure 30.10 Salt Ponds. The waters of an evaporative salt works near San Francisco are colored pink by thriving communities of
photosynthetic organisms. These waters are about ten times as salty as seawater—enough for sodium chloride to begin to
crystallize out—yet some organisms can survive and thrive in these conditions. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
Very high pressures can literally squeeze life’s biomolecules, causing them to adopt more compact forms that
do not work very well. But we still find life—not just microbial, but even animal life—at the bottoms of our
ocean trenches, where pressures are more than 1000 times atmospheric pressure. Many other adaptions to
environmental “extremes” are also known. There is even an organism, Deinococcus radiodurans, that can
tolerate ionizing radiation (such as that released by radioactive elements) a thousand times more intense than
you would be able to withstand. It is also very good at surviving extreme desiccation (drying out) and a variety
30 • Life in the Universe
of metals that would be toxic to humans.
From many such examples, we can conclude that life is capable of tolerating a wide range of environmental
extremes—so much so that we have to work hard to identify places where life can’t exist. A few such places
are known—for example, the waters of hydrothermal vents at over 300 °C appear too hot to support any
life—and finding these places helps define the possibility for life elsewhere. The study of extremophiles over
the last few decades has expanded our sense of the range of conditions life can survive and, in doing so, has
made many scientists more optimistic about the possibility that life might exist beyond Earth.
30.3
Searching for Life beyond Earth
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Outline what we have learned from exploration of the environment on Mars
Identify where in the solar system life is most likely sustainable and why
Describe some key missions and their findings in our search for life beyond our solar system
Explain the use of biomarkers in the search for evidence of life beyond our solar system
Astronomers and planetary scientists continue to search for life in the solar system and the universe at large.
In this section, we discuss two kinds of searches. First is the direct exploration of planets within our own solar
system, especially Mars and some of the icy moons of the outer solar system. Second is the even more difficult
task of searching for evidence of life—a biomarker—on planets circling other stars. In the next section, we will
examine SETI, the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. As you will see, the approaches taken in these three
cases are very different, even though the goal of each is the same: to determine if life on Earth is unique in the
universe.
Life on Mars
The possibility that Mars hosts, or has hosted, life has a rich history dating back to the “canals” that some
people claimed to see on the martian surface toward the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of
the twentieth. With the dawn of the space age came the possibility to address this question up close through a
progression of missions to Mars that began with the first successful flyby of a robotic spacecraft in 1964 and
have led to the deployment of capable rovers, like Curiosity and Perseverance, with instruments to look for
organic chemistry.
The earliest missions to Mars provided some hints that liquid water—one of life’s primary requirements—may
once have flowed on the surface, and later missions have strengthened this conclusion. The NASA Viking
landers, whose purpose was to search directly for evidence of life on Mars, arrived on Mars in 1976. Viking’s
onboard instruments found no organic molecules (the stuff of which life is made), and no evidence of
biological activity in the martian soils it analyzed.
This result is not particularly surprising because, despite the evidence of flowing liquid water in the past, liquid
water on the surface of Mars is generally not stable today. Over much of Mars, temperatures and pressures at
the surface are so low that pure water would either freeze or boil away (under very low pressures, water will
boil at a much lower temperature than usual). To make matters worse, unlike Earth, Mars does not have a
magnetic field and ozone layer to protect the surface from harmful solar ultraviolet radiation and energetic
particles. However, Viking’s analyses of the soil said nothing about whether life may have existed in Mars’
distant past, when liquid water was more abundant. We do know that water in the form of ice exists in
abundance on Mars, not so deep beneath its surface. Water vapor is also a constituent of the atmosphere of
Mars.
Since the visit of Viking, our understanding of Mars has deepened spectacularly. Orbiting spacecraft have
provided ever-more detailed images of the surface and detected the presence of minerals that could have
formed only in the presence of liquid water. Two bold surface missions, the Mars Exploration Rovers Spirit and
30.3 • Searching for Life beyond Earth
Opportunity (2004), followed by the much larger Curiosity Rover (2012), confirmed these remote-sensing data.
All three rovers found abundant evidence for a past history of liquid water, revealed not only from the
mineralogy of rocks they analyzed, but also from the unique layering of rock formations.
Curiosity has gone a step beyond evidence for water and confirmed the existence of habitable environments
on ancient Mars. “Habitable” means not only that liquid water was present, but that life’s requirements for
energy and elemental raw materials could also have been met. The strongest evidence of an ancient habitable
environment came from analyzing a very fine-grained rock called a mudstone—a rock type that is widespread
on Earth but was unknown on Mars until Curiosity found it (see Figure 30.11). The mudstone can tell us a great
deal about the wet environments in which they formed. The Perseverance rover is collecting samples of
sedimentary rock in a former lakebed, to later return to Earth for laboratory analysis.
Figure 30.11 Mudstone. Shown are the first holes drilled by NASA’s Curiosity Mars rover into a mudstone, with “fresh” drill-pilings
around the holes. Notice the difference in color between the red ancient martian surface and the gray newly exposed rock powder
that came from the drill holes. Each drill hole is about 0.6 inch (1.6 cm) in diameter. (credit: modification of work by NASA/JPL-
Caltech/MSSS)
Five decades of robotic exploration have allowed us to develop a picture of how Mars evolved through time.
Early Mars had epochs of warmer and wetter conditions that would have been conducive to life at the surface.
However, Mars eventually lost much of its early atmosphere and the surface water began to dry up. As that
happened, the ever-shrinking reservoirs of liquid water on the martian surface became saltier and more acidic,
until the surface finally had no significant liquid water and was bathed in harsh solar radiation. The surface
thus became uninhabitable, but this might not be the case for the planet overall.
Reservoirs of ice and liquid water could still exist underground, where pressure and temperature conditions
make it stable. There is recent evidence to suggest that liquid water (probably very salty water) can
occasionally (and briefly) flow on the surface even today. Thus, Mars might even have habitable conditions in
the present day, but of a much different sort than we normally think of on Earth.
Our study of Mars reveals a planet with a fascinating history—one that saw its ability to host surface life
dwindle billions of years ago, but perhaps allowing life to adapt and survive in favorable environmental niches.
Even if life did not survive, we expect that we might find evidence of life if it ever took hold on Mars. If it is
there, it is hidden in the crust, and we are still learning how best to decipher that evidence.
Life in the Outer Solar System
The massive gas and ice giant planets of the outer solar system—Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune—are
almost certainly not habitable for life as we know it, but some of their moons might be (see Figure 30.12).
Although these worlds in the outer solar system contain abundant water, they receive so little warming
sunlight in their distant orbits that it was long believed they would be “geologically dead” balls of hard-frozen
ice and rock. But, as we saw in the chapter on Rings, Moons, and Pluto, missions to the outer solar system
have found something much more interesting.
30 • Life in the Universe
Jupiter’s moon Europa revealed itself to the Voyager and Galileo missions as an active world whose icy surface
apparently conceals an ocean with a depth of tens to perhaps a hundred kilometers. As the moon orbits
Jupiter, the planet’s massive gravity creates tides on Europa—just as our own Moon’s gravity creates our
ocean tides—and the friction of all that pushing and pulling generates enough heat to keep the water in liquid
form (Figure 30.13). Similar tides act upon other moons if they orbit close to the planet. Scientists now think
that six or more of the outer solar system’s icy moons may harbor liquid water oceans for the same reason.
Among these, Europa and Enceladus, a moon of Saturn, have thus far been of greatest interest to
astrobiologists.
Figure 30.12 Jupiter’s Moons. The Galilean moons of Jupiter are shown to relative scale and arranged in order of their orbital
distance from Jupiter. At far left, Io orbits closest to Jupiter and so experiences the strongest tidal heating by Jupiter’s massive
gravity. This effect is so strong that Io is thought to be the most volcanically active body in our solar system. At far right, Callisto
shows a surface scarred by billions of years’ worth of craters—an indication that the moon’s surface is old and that Callisto may be
far less active than its sibling moons. Between these hot and cold extremes, Europa, second from left, orbits at a distance where
Jupiter’s tidal heating may be “just right” to sustain a liquid water ocean beneath its icy crust. (credit: modification of work by NASA/
JPL/DLR)
Europa has probably had an ocean for most or all of its history, but habitability requires more than just liquid
water. Life also requires energy, and because sunlight does not penetrate below the kilometers-thick ice crust
of Europa, this would have to be chemical energy. One of Europa’s key attributes from an astrobiology
perspective is that its ocean is most likely in direct contact with an underlying rocky mantle, and the interaction
of water and rocks—especially at high temperatures, as within Earth’s hydrothermal vent systems—yields a
reducing chemistry (where molecules tend to give up electrons readily) that is like one half of a chemical
battery. To complete the battery and provide energy that could be used by life requires that an oxidizing
chemistry (where molecules tend to accept electrons readily) also be available. On Earth, when chemically
reducing vent fluids meet oxygen-containing seawater, the energy that becomes available often supports
thriving communities of microorganisms and animals on the sea floor, far from the light of the Sun.
The Galileo mission found that Europa’s icy surface does contain an abundance of oxidizing chemicals. This
means that availability of energy to support life depends very much on whether the chemistry of the surface
and the ocean can mix, despite the kilometers of ice in between. That Europa’s ice crust appears geologically
“young” (only tens of millions of years old, on average) and that it is active makes it tantalizing to think that
such mixing might indeed occur. Understanding whether and how much exchange occurs between the
surface and ocean of Europa will be a key science objective of future missions to Europa, and a major step
forward in understanding whether this moon could be a cradle of life.
30.3 • Searching for Life beyond Earth
Figure 30.13 Jupiter’s Moon Europa, as Imaged by NASA’s Galileo Mission. The relative scarcity of craters on Europa suggests a
surface that is “geologically young,” and the network of colored ridges and cracks suggests constant activity and motion. Galileo’s
instruments also strongly suggested the presence of a massive ocean of salty liquid water beneath the icy crust. (credit: modification
of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech/SETI Institute)
In 2005, the Cassini mission performed a close flyby of a small (500-kilometer diameter) moon of Saturn,
Enceladus (Figure 30.14), and made a remarkable discovery. Plumes of gas and icy material were venting from
the moon’s south polar region at a collective rate of about 250 kilograms of material per second. Several
observations, including the discovery of salts associated with the icy material, suggest that their source is a
liquid water ocean beneath tens of kilometers of ice. Although it remains to be shown definitively whether the
ocean is local or global, transient or long-lived, it does appear to be in contact, and to have reacted, with a
rocky interior. As on Europa, this is probably a necessary—though not sufficient—condition for habitability.
What makes Enceladus so enticing to planetary scientists, though, are those plumes of material that seem to
come directly from its ocean: samples of the interior are there for the taking by any spacecraft sent flying
through. For a future mission, such samples could yield evidence not only of whether Enceladus is habitable
but, indeed, of whether it is home to life.
Figure 30.14 Image of Saturn’s Moon Enceladus from NASA’s Cassini Mission. The south polar region was found to have multiple
plumes of ice and gas that, combined, are venting about 250 kilograms of material per second into space. Such features suggest that
Enceladus, like Europa, has a sub-ice ocean. (credit: NASA/JPL/ SSI)
Saturn’s big moon Titan is very different from both Enceladus and Europa (see Figure 30.15). Although it may
host a liquid water layer deep within its interior, it is the surface of Titan and its unusual chemistry that makes
this moon such an interesting place. Titan’s thick atmosphere—the only one among moons in the solar
system—is composed mostly of nitrogen but also of about 5% methane. In the upper atmosphere, the Sun’s
ultraviolet light breaks apart and recombines these molecules into more complex organic compounds that are
collectively known as tholins. The tholins shroud Titan in an orange haze, and imagery from Cassini and from
the Huygens probe that descended to Titan’s surface show that heavier particles appear to accumulate on the
surface, even forming “dunes” that are cut and sculpted by flows of liquid hydrocarbons (such as liquid
30 • Life in the Universe
methane). Some scientists see this organic chemical factory as a natural laboratory that may yield some clues
about the solar system’s early chemistry—perhaps even chemistry that could support the origin of life.
Figure 30.15 Image of Saturn’s Moon Titan from NASA’s Cassini Mission. (a) The hazy orange glow comes from Titan’s thick
atmosphere (the only one known among the moons of the solar system). That atmosphere is mostly nitrogen but also contains
methane and potentially a variety of complex organic compounds. The bright spot near the top of the image is sunlight reflected
from a very flat surface—almost certainly a liquid. We see this effect, called “glint,” when sunlight reflects off the surface of a lake or
ocean. (b) Cassini radar imagery shows what look very much like landforms and lakes on the surface of Titan. But the surface lakes
and oceans of Titan are not water; they are probably made of liquid hydrocarbons like methane and ethane. (credit a: modification of
work by NASA/JPL/University of Arizona/DLR; credit b: modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech/ASI)
In January 2005, the Huygens probe descended to the surface of Titan and relayed data, including imagery
of the landing site, for about 90 minutes. You can watch a video (https://openstax.org/l/30huytatsurf)
about the descent of Huygens to Titan’s surface.
Habitable Planets Orbiting Other Stars
One of the most exciting developments in astronomy during the last two decades is the ability to detect
exoplanets—planets orbiting other stars. As we saw in the chapter on the formation of stars and planets, since
the discovery of the first exoplanet in 1995, there have been thousands of confirmed detections, and many
more candidates that are not yet confirmed. These include several dozen possibly habitable exoplanets. Such
numbers finally allow us to make some predictions about exoplanets and their life-hosting potential. The
majority of stars with mass similar to the Sun appear to host at least one planet, with multi-planet systems like
our own not unusual. How many of these planets might be habitable, and how could we search for life there?
The NASA Exoplanet Archive (https://openstax.org/l/30NASAexoarc) is an up-to-date searchable online
source of data and tools on everything to do with exoplanets. Explore stellar and exoplanet parameters and
characteristics, find the latest news on exoplanet discoveries, plot your own data interactively, and link to
other related resources.
LINK TO LEARNING
LINK TO LEARNING
30.3 • Searching for Life beyond Earth
In evaluating the prospect for life in distant planetary systems, astrobiologists have developed the idea of a
habitable zone—a region around a star where suitable conditions might exist for life. This concept focuses on
life’s requirement for liquid water, and the habitable zone is generally thought of as the range of distances
from the central star in which water could be present in liquid form at a planet’s surface. In our own solar
system, for example, Venus has surface temperatures far above the boiling point of water and Mars has
surface temperatures that are almost always below the freezing point of water. Earth, which orbits between
the two, has a surface temperature that is “just right” to keep much of our surface water in liquid form.
Whether surface temperatures are suitable for maintaining liquid water depends on a planet’s “radiation
budget” —how much starlight energy it absorbs and retains—and whether or how processes like winds and
ocean circulation distribute that energy around the planet. How much stellar energy a planet receives, in turn,
depends on how much and what sort of light the star emits and how far the planet is from that star,1 how
much it reflects back to space, and how effectively the planet’s atmosphere can retain heat through the
greenhouse effect (see Earth as a Planet). All of these can vary substantially, and all matter a lot. For example,
Venus receives about twice as much starlight per square meter as Earth but, because of its dense cloud cover,
also reflects about twice as much of that light back to space as Earth does. Mars receives only about half as
much starlight as Earth, but also reflects only about half as much. Thus, despite their differing orbital
distances, the three planets actually absorb comparable amounts of sunlight energy. Why, then, are they so
dramatically different?
As we learned in several chapters about the planets, some of the gases that make up planetary atmospheres
are very effective at trapping infrared light—the very range of wavelengths at which planets radiate thermal
energy back out to space—and this can raise the planet’s surface temperature quite a bit more than would
otherwise be the case. This is the same “greenhouse effect” that is of such concern for global warming on our
planet. Earth’s natural greenhouse effect, which comes mostly from water vapor and carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere, raises our average surface temperature by about 33 °C over the value it would have if there were
no greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Mars has a very thin atmosphere and thus very little greenhouse
warming (about 2 °C worth), while Venus has a massive carbon dioxide atmosphere that creates very strong
greenhouse warming (about 510 °C worth). These worlds are much colder and much hotter, respectively, than
Earth would be if moved into their orbits. Thus, we must consider the nature of any atmosphere as well as the
distance from the star in evaluating the range of habitability.
Of course, as we have learned, stars also vary widely in the intensity and spectrum (the wavelengths of light)
they emit. Some are much brighter and hotter (bluer), while others are significantly dimmer and cooler
(redder), and the distance of the habitable zone varies accordingly. For example, the habitable zone around Mdwarf stars is 3 to 30 times closer in than for G-type (Sun-like) stars. There is a lot of interest in whether such
systems could be habitable because—although they have some potential downsides for supporting life—Mdwarf stars are by far the most numerous and long-lived in our Galaxy.
The luminosity of stars like the Sun also increases over their main-sequence lifetime, and this means that the
habitable zone migrates outward as a star system ages. Calculations indicate that the power output of the Sun,
for example, has increased by at least 30% over the past 4 billion years. Thus, Venus was once within the
habitable zone, while Earth received a level of solar energy insufficient to keep the modern Earth (with its
present atmosphere) from freezing over. In spite of this, there is plenty of geological evidence that liquid
water was present on Earth’s surface billions of years ago. The phenomenon of increasing stellar output and
an outwardly migrating habitable zone has led to another concept: the continuously habitable zone is defined
by the range of orbits that would remain within the habitable zone during the entire lifetime of the star
system. As you might imagine, the continuously habitable zone is quite a bit narrower than the habitable zone
The amount of starlight received per unit area of a planet’s surface (per square meter, for example) decreases with the square of
the distance from the star. Thus, when the orbital distance doubles, the illumination decreases by 4 times (22), and when the orbital
distance increases tenfold, the illumination decreases by 100 times (102). Venus and Mars orbit the sun at about 72% and 152% of
Earth’s orbital distance, respectively, so Venus receives about 1/(0.72)2 = 1.92 (about twice) and Mars about 1/(1.52)2 = 0.43 (about
half) as much light per square meter of planet surface as Earth does.
30 • Life in the Universe
is at any one time in a star’s history. The nearest star to the Sun, Proxima Centauri, is an M star that has a
planet with a mass of at least 1.3 Earth masses, taking about 11 days to orbit. At the distance for such a quick
orbit (0.05 AU), the planet may be in the habitable zone of its star, although whether conditions on such a
planet near such a star are hospitable for life is a matter of great scientific debate.
Even when planets orbit within the habitable zone of their star, it is no guarantee that they are habitable. For
example, Venus today has virtually no water, so even if it were suddenly moved to a “just right” orbit within
the habitable zone, a critical requirement for life would still be lacking.
Scientists are working to understand all the factors that define the habitable zone and the habitability of
planets orbiting within that zone because this will be our primary guide in targeting exoplanets on which to
seek evidence of life. As technology for detecting exoplanets has advanced, so too has our potential to find
Earth-size worlds within the habitable zones of their parent stars. Of the confirmed or candidate exoplanets
known at the time of writing, nearly 300 are considered to be orbiting within the habitable zone and more than
10% of those are roughly Earth-size.
Explore the habitable universe at the online Planetary Habitability Laboratory (https://openstax.org/l/
30planhabitlab) created by the University of Puerto Rico at Arecibo. See the potentially habitable exoplanets
and other interesting places in the universe, watch video clips, and link to numerous related resources on
astrobiology.
Biomarkers
Our observations suggest increasingly that Earth-size planets orbiting within the habitable zone may be
common in the Galaxy—current estimates suggest that more than 40% of stars have at least one. But are any
of them inhabited? With no ability to send probes there to sample, we will have to derive the answer from the
light and other radiation that come to us from these faraway systems (Figure 30.16). What types of
observations might constitute good evidence for life?
Figure 30.16 Earth, as Seen by NASA’s Voyager 1. In this image, taken from 4 billion miles away, Earth appears as a “pale blue dot”
LINK TO LEARNING
30.3 • Searching for Life beyond Earth
representing less than a pixel’s worth of light. Would this light reveal Earth as a habitable and inhabited world? Our search for life on
exoplanets will depend on an ability to extract information about life from the faint light of faraway worlds. (credit: modification of
work by NASA/JPL-Caltech)
To be sure, we need to look for robust biospheres (atmospheres, surfaces, and/or oceans) capable of creating
planet-scale change. Earth hosts such a biosphere: the composition of our atmosphere and the spectrum of
light reflected from our planet differ considerably from what would be expected in the absence of life.
Presently, Earth is the only body in our solar system for which this is true, despite the possibility that habitable
conditions might prevail in the subsurface of Mars or inside the icy moons of the outer solar system. Even if
life exists on these worlds, it is very unlikely that it could yield planet-scale changes that are both telescopically
observable and clearly biological in origin.
What makes Earth “special” among the potentially habitable worlds in our solar system is that it has a
photosynthetic biosphere. This requires the presence of liquid water at the planet’s surface, where organisms
have direct access to sunlight. The habitable zone concept focuses on this requirement for surface liquid
water—even though we know that subsurface habitable conditions could prevail at more distant
orbits—exactly because these worlds would have biospheres detectable at a distance.
Indeed, plants and photosynthetic microorganisms are so abundant at Earth’s surface that they affect the
color of the light that our planet reflects out into space—we appear greener in visible wavelengths and reflect
more near-infrared light than we otherwise would. Moreover, photosynthesis has changed Earth’s
atmosphere at a large scale—more than 20% of our atmosphere comes from the photosynthetic waste
product, oxygen. Such high levels would be very difficult to explain in the absence of life. Other gases, such as
nitrous oxide and methane, when found simultaneously with oxygen, have also been suggested as possible
indicators of life. When sufficiently abundant in an atmosphere, such gases could be detected by their effect
on the spectrum of light that a planet emits or reflects. (As we saw in the chapter on exoplanets, astronomers
today are beginning to have the capability of detecting the spectrum of the atmospheres of some planets
orbiting other stars.)
Astronomers have thus concluded that, at least initially, a search for life outside our solar system should focus
on exoplanets that are as much like Earth as possible—roughly Earth-size planets orbiting in the habitable
zone—and look for the presence of gases in the atmosphere or colors in the visible spectrum that are hard to
explain except by the presence of biology. Simple, right? In reality, the search for exoplanet life poses many
challenges.
As you might imagine, this task is more challenging for planetary systems that are farther away and, in
practical terms, this will limit our search to the habitable worlds closest to our own. Should we become limited
to a very small number of nearby targets, it will also become important to consider the habitability of planets
orbiting the M-dwarfs we discussed above.
If we manage to separate out a clean signal from the planet and find some features in the light spectrum that
might be indicative of life, we will need to work hard to think of any nonbiological process that might account
for them. “Life is the hypothesis of last resort,” noted astronomer Carl Sagan—meaning that we must exhaust
all other explanations for what we see before claiming to have found evidence of extraterrestrial biology. This
requires some understanding of what processes might operate on worlds that we will know relatively little
about; what we find on Earth can serve as a guide but also has potential to lead us astray (Figure 30.17).
Recall, for example, that it would be extremely difficult to account for the abundance of oxygen in Earth’s
atmosphere except by the presence of biology. But it has been hypothesized that oxygen could build up to
substantial levels on planets orbiting M-dwarf stars through the action of ultraviolet radiation on the
atmosphere—with no need for biology. It will be critical to understand where such “false positives” might exist
in carrying out our search.
We need to understand that we might not be able to detect biospheres even if they exist. Life has flourished
on Earth for perhaps 3.5 billion years, but the atmospheric “biosignatures” that, today, would supply good
30 • Life in the Universe
evidence for life to distant astronomers have not been present for all of that time. Oxygen, for example,
accumulated to detectable levels in our atmosphere only a little over 2 billion years ago. Could life on Earth
have been detected before that time? Scientists are working actively to understand what additional features
might have provided evidence of life on Earth during that early history, and thereby help our chances of
finding life beyond.
Figure 30.17 Spectrum of Light Transmitted through Earth’s Atmosphere. This graph shows wavelengths ranging from
ultraviolet (far left) to infrared. The many downward “spikes” come from absorption of particular wavelengths by molecules in
Earth’s atmosphere. Some of these compounds, like water and the combination oxygen/ozone and methane, might reveal Earth as
both habitable and inhabited. We will have to rely on this sort of information to seek life on exoplanets, but our spectra will be of
much poorer quality than this one, in part because we will receive so little light from the planet. (credit: modification of work by
NASA)
30.4
The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain why spaceships from extraterrestrial civilizations are unlikely to have visited us
List efforts by humankind to communicate with other civilizations via messages on spacecraft
Understand the various SETI programs scientists are undertaking
Given all the developments discussed in this chapter, it seems likely that life could have developed on many
planets around other stars. Even if that life is microbial, we saw that we may soon have ways to search for
chemical biosignatures. This search is of fundamental importance for understanding biology, but it does not
answer the question, “Are we alone?” that we raised at the beginning of this chapter. When we ask this
question, many people think of other intelligent creatures, perhaps beings that have developed technology
similar to our own. If any intelligent, technical civilizations have arisen, as has happened on Earth in the most
recent blink of cosmic time, how could we make contact with them?
This problem is similar to making contact with people who live in a remote part of Earth. If students in the
United States want to converse with students in Australia, for example, they have two choices. Either one
group gets on an airplane and travels to meet the other, or they communicate by sending a message
remotely. Given how expensive airline tickets are, most students would probably select the message route.
In the same way, if we want to get in touch with intelligent life around other stars, we can travel, or we can try
to exchange messages. Because of the great distances involved, interstellar space travel would be very slow
and prohibitively expensive. The fastest spacecraft the human species has built so far would take almost
80,000 years to get to the nearest star. While we could certainly design a faster craft, the more quickly we
require it to travel, the greater the energy cost involved. To reach neighboring stars in less than a human life
span, we would have to travel close to the speed of light. In that case, however, the expense would become
30.4 • The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
truly astronomical.
Interstellar Travel
Bernard Oliver, an engineer with an abiding interest in life elsewhere, made a revealing calculation about the
costs of rapid interstellar space travel. Since we do not know what sort of technology we (or other civilizations)
might someday develop, Oliver considered a trip to the nearest star (and back again) in a spaceship with a
“perfect engine”—one that would convert its fuel into energy with 100% efficiency. Even with a perfect engine,
the energy cost of a single round-trip journey at 70% the speed of light turns out to be equivalent to several
hundred thousand years’ worth of total U.S. electrical energy consumption. The cost of such travel is literally
out of this world.
This is one reason astronomers are so skeptical about claims that UFOs are spaceships from extraterrestrial
civilizations. Given the distance and energy expense involved, it seems unlikely that the dozens of UFOs (and
even UFO abductions) claimed each year could be visitors from other stars so fascinated by Earth civilization
that they are willing to expend fantastically large amounts of energy or time to reach us. Nor does it seem
credible that these visitors have made this long and expensive journey and then systematically avoided
contacting our governments or political and intellectual leaders.
Not every UFO report has been explained (in many cases, the observations are sketchy or contradictory). But
investigation almost always converts them to IFOs (identified flying objects) or NFOs (not-at-all flying objects).
While some are hoaxes, others are natural phenomena, such as bright planets, ball lightning, fireballs (bright
meteors), or even flocks of birds that landed in an oil slick to make their bellies reflective. Still others are
human craft, such as private planes with some lights missing, or secret military aircraft. It is also interesting
that the group of people who most avidly look at the night sky, the amateur astronomers, have never reported
UFO sightings. Further, not a single UFO has ever left behind any physical evidence that can be tested in a
laboratory and shown to be of nonterrestrial origin.
Another common aspect of belief that aliens are visiting Earth comes from people who have difficulty
accepting human accomplishments. There are many books and TV shows, for example, that assert that
humans could not have built the great pyramids of Egypt, and therefore they must have been built by aliens.
The huge statues (called Moai) on Easter Island are also sometimes claimed to have been built by aliens. Some
people even think that the accomplishments of space exploration today are based on alien technology.
However, the evidence from archaeology and history is clear: ancient monuments were built by ancient
people, whose brains and ingenuity were every bit as capable as ours are today, even if they didn’t have
electronic textbooks like you do.
Messages on Spacecraft
While space travel by living creatures seems very difficult, robot probes can travel over long distances and over
long periods of time. Five spacecraft—two Pioneers, two Voyagers, and New Horizons—are now leaving the
solar system. At their coasting speeds, they will take hundreds of thousands or millions of years to get
anywhere close to another star. On the other hand, they were the first products of human technology to go
beyond our home system, so we wanted to put messages on board to show where they came from.
Each Pioneer carries a plaque with a pictorial message engraved on a gold-anodized aluminum plate (Figure
30.18). The Voyagers, launched in 1977, have audio and video records attached, which allowed the inclusion of
over 100 photographs and a selection of music from around the world. Given the enormous space between
stars in our section of the Galaxy, it is very unlikely that these messages will ever be received by anyone. They
are more like a note in a bottle thrown into the sea by a shipwrecked sailor, with no realistic expectation of its
being found soon but a slim hope that perhaps someday, somehow, someone will know of the sender’s fate.
30 • Life in the Universe
Figure 30.18 Interstellar Messages. (a) This is the image engraved on the plaques aboard the Pioneer 10 and 11 spacecraft. The
human figures are drawn in proportion to the spacecraft, which is shown behind them. The Sun and planets in the solar system can
be seen at the bottom, with the trajectory that the spacecraft followed. The lines and markings in the left center show the positions
and pulse periods for a number of pulsars, which might help locate the spacecraft’s origins in space and time. (b) Encoded onto a
gold-coated copper disk, the Voyager record contains 118 photographs, 90 minutes of music from around the world, greetings in
almost 60 languages, and other audio material. It is a summary of the sights and sounds of Earth. (credit a, b: modification of work
by NASA)
The Voyager Message
An Excerpt from the Voyager Record:
“We cast this message into the cosmos. It is likely to survive a billion years into our future, when our
civilization is profoundly altered. . . . If [another] civilization intercepts Voyager and can understand these
recorded contents, here is our message:
This is a present from a small, distant world, a token of our sounds, our science, our images, our music, our
thoughts, and our feelings. We are attempting to survive our time so we may live into yours. We hope,
someday, having solved the problems we face, to join a community of galactic civilizations. This record
represents our hope and our determination, and our goodwill in a vast and awesome universe.”
—Jimmy Carter, President of the United States of America, June 16, 1977
Communicating with the Stars
If direct visits among stars are unlikely, we must turn to the alternative for making contact: exchanging
messages. Here the news is a lot better. We already use a messenger—light or, more generally,
electromagnetic waves—that moves through space at the fastest speed in the universe. Traveling at 300,000
kilometers per second, light reaches the nearest star in only 4 years and does so at a tiny fraction of the cost of
sending material objects. These advantages are so clear and obvious that we assume they will occur to any
other species of intelligent beings that develop technology.
However, we have access to a wide spectrum of electromagnetic radiation, ranging from the longestwavelength radio waves to the shortest-wavelength gamma rays. Which would be the best for interstellar
communication? It would not be smart to select a wavelength that is easily absorbed by interstellar gas and
MAKING CONNECTIONS
30.4 • The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
dust, or one that is unlikely to penetrate the atmosphere of a planet like ours. Nor would we want to pick a
wavelength that has lots of competition for attention in our neighborhood.
One final criterion makes the selection easier: we want the radiation to be inexpensive enough to produce in
large quantities. When we consider all these requirements, radio waves turn out to be the best answer. Being
the lowest-frequency (and lowest-energy) band of the spectrum, they are not very expensive to produce, and
we already use them extensively for communications on Earth. They are not significantly absorbed by
interstellar dust and gas. With some exceptions, they easily pass through Earth’s atmosphere and through the
atmospheres of the other planets we are acquainted with.
The Cosmic Haystack
Having made the decision that radio is the most likely means of communication among intelligent civilizations,
we still have many questions and a daunting task ahead of us. Shall we send a message, or try to receive one?
Obviously, if every civilization decides to receive only, then no one will be sending, and everyone will be
disappointed. On the other hand, it may be appropriate for us to begin by listening, since we are likely to be
among the most primitive civilizations in the Galaxy who are interested in exchanging messages.
We do not make this statement to insult the human species (which, with certain exceptions, we are rather fond
of). Instead, we base it on the fact that humans have had the ability to receive (or send) a radio message
across interstellar distances for only a few decades. Compared to the ages of the stars and the Galaxy, this is a
mere instant. If there are civilizations out there that are ahead of us in development by even a short time (in
the cosmic sense), they are likely to have a technology head start of many, many years.
In other words, we, who have just started, may well be the “youngest” species in the Galaxy with this capability
(see the discussion in Example 30.1). Just as the youngest members of a community are often told to be quiet
and listen to their elders for a while before they say something foolish, so may we want to begin our exercise
in extraterrestrial communication by listening.
Even restricting our activities to listening, however, leaves us with an array of challenging questions. For
example, if an extraterrestrial civilization’s signal is too weak to be detected by our present-day radio
telescopes, we will not detect them. In addition, it would be very expensive for an extraterrestrial civilization to
broadcast on a huge number of channels. Most likely, they select one or a few channels for their particular
message. Communicating on a narrow band of channels also helps distinguish an artificial message from the
radio static that comes from natural cosmic processes. But the radio band contains an astronomically large
number of possible channels. How can we know in advance which one they have selected, and how they have
coded their message into the signal?
Table 30.1 summarizes these and other factors that scientists must grapple with when trying to tune in to
radio messages from distant civilizations. Because their success depends on either guessing right about so
many factors or searching through all the possibilities for each factor, some scientists have compared their
quest to looking for a needle in a haystack. Thus, they like to say that the list of factors in Table 30.1 defines the
cosmic haystack problem.
The Cosmic Haystack Problem: Some Questions about an Extraterrestrial Message
Factors
From which direction (which star) is the message coming?
On what channels (or frequencies) is the message being broadcast?
Table 30.1
30 • Life in the Universe
Factors
How wide in frequency is the channel?
How strong is the signal (can our radio telescopes detect it)?
Is the signal continuous, or does it shut off at times (as, for example, a lighthouse beam does when it turns
away from us)?
Does the signal drift (change) in frequency because of the changing relative motion of the source and the
receiver?
How is the message encoded in the signal (how do we decipher it)?
Can we even recognize a message from a completely alien species? Might it take a form we don’t at all
expect?
Table 30.1
Radio Searches
Although the cosmic haystack problem seems daunting, many other research problems in astronomy also
require a large investment of time, equipment, and patient effort. And, of course, if we don’t search, we’re
sure not to find anything.
The very first search was conducted by astronomer Frank Drake in 1960, using the 85-foot antenna at the
National Radio Astronomy Observatory (Figure 30.19). Called Project Ozma, after the queen of the exotic Land
of Oz in the children’s stories of L. Frank Baum, his experiment involved looking at about 7200 channels and
two nearby stars over a period of 200 hours. Although he found nothing, Drake demonstrated that we had the
technology to do such a search, and set the stage for the more sophisticated projects that followed.
Figure 30.19 Project Ozma and the Allen Telescope Array. (a) This 25th anniversary photo shows some members of the Project
Ozma team standing in front of the 85-foot radio telescope with which the 1960 search for extraterrestrial messages was performed.
Frank Drake is in the back row, second from the right. (b) The Allen Telescope Array in California is made up of 42 small antennas
linked together. This system allows simultaneous observations of multiple sources with millions of separate frequency channels.
(credit a: modification of work by NRAO; credit b: modification of work by Colby Gutierrez-Kraybill)
30.4 • The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
Receivers are constantly improving, and the sensitivity of SETI programs—SETI stands for the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence—is advancing rapidly. Equally important, modern electronics and software allow
simultaneous searches on millions of frequencies (channels). If we can thus cover a broad frequency range,
the cosmic haystack problem of guessing the right frequency largely goes away. One powerful telescope array
(funded with an initial contribution from Microsoft founder Paul Allen) that is built for SETI searches is the
Allen Telescope in Northern California. Other radio telescopes being used for such searches have included the
giant Arecibo radio dish in Puerto Rico (which, sadly, collapsed due to storm damage in late 2020), the recently
completed, and even larger, FAST dish in China, and the Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia, which is the
largest steerable radio telescope in the world.
In 2015, Silicon Valley investor and philanthropist Yuri Milner donated 100 million dollars to the University of
California, Berkeley, to enhance the SETI endeavor for ten years. The project, called Breakthrough: Listen, is
enlisting more telescopes around the world in the search and is developing sophisticated artificial intelligence
programs to scour the incoming signals for intelligent messages. The aim is to search more stars and more
channels than any SETI project so far.
What kind of signals do we hope to pick up? We on Earth are inadvertently sending out a flood of radio signals,
dominated by military radar systems. This is a kind of leakage signal, similar to the wasted light energy that is
beamed upward by poorly designed streetlights and advertising signs. Could we detect a similar leakage of
radio signals from another civilization? The answer is just barely, but only for the nearest stars. For the most
part, therefore, current radio SETI searches are looking for beacons, assuming that civilizations might be
intentionally drawing attention to themselves or perhaps sending a message to another world or outpost that
lies in our direction. Our prospects for success depend on how often civilizations arise, how long they last, and
how patient they are about broadcasting their locations to the cosmos.
Jill Tarter: Trying to Make Contact
1997 was quite a year for Jill Cornell Tarter (Figure 30.20), one of the world’s leading scientists in the SETI
field. The SETI Institute announced that she would be the recipient of its first endowed chair (the equivalent
of an endowed research professorship) named in honor of Bernard Oliver. The National Science Foundation
approved a proposal by a group of scientists and educators she headed to develop an innovative hands-on
high school curriculum based on the ideas of cosmic evolution (the topics of this chapter). And, at roughly
the same time, she was being besieged with requests for media interviews as news reports identified her as
the model for Ellie Arroway, the protagonist of Contact, Carl Sagan’s best-selling novel about SETI. The book
had been made into a high-budget science fiction film, starring Jodie Foster, who had talked with Tarter
before taking the role.
VOYAGERS IN ASTRONOMY
30 • Life in the Universe
Figure 30.20 Jill Tarter (credit: Christian Schidlowski)
Tarter is quick to point out, “Carl Sagan wrote a book about a woman who does what I do, not about me.”
Still, as the only woman in such a senior position in the small field of SETI, she was the center of a great deal
of public attention. (However, colleagues and reporters pointed out that this was nothing compared to
what would happen if her search for radio signals from other civilizations recorded a success.)
Being the only woman in a group is not a new situation to Tarter, who often found herself the only woman
in her advanced science or math classes. Her father had encouraged her, both in her interest in science and
her “tinkering.” As an undergraduate at Cornell University, she majored in engineering physics. That
training became key to putting together and maintaining the complex systems that automatically scan for
signals from other civilizations.
Switching to astrophysics for her graduate studies, she wrote a PhD thesis that, among other topics,
considered the formation of failed stars—those whose mass was not sufficient to ignite the nuclear
reactions that power more massive stars like our own Sun. Tarter coined the term “brown dwarf” for these
small, dim objects, and it has remained the name astronomers use ever since.
It was while she was still in graduate school that Stuart Bowyer, one of her professors at the University of
California, Berkeley, asked her if she wanted to be involved in a small experiment to siphon off a bit of
radiation from a radio telescope as astronomers used it year in and year out and see if there was any hint
of an intelligently coded radio message buried in the radio noise. Her engineering and computer
programming skills became essential to the project, and soon she was hooked on the search for life
elsewhere.
Thus began an illustrious career working full time searching for what she calls the technosignatures (signs
of technology) from extraterrestrial civilizations. Tarter has received many awards, including being elected
fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in 2002, the Adler Planetarium Women
in Space Science Award in 2003, and a 2009 TED Prize.
Watch the TED talk (https://openstax.org/l/30TarterSETI) Jill Tarter gave on the fascination of the search for
intelligence.
LINK TO LEARNING
30.4 • The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
E X A M P L E 3 0 . 1
The Drake Equation
At the first scientific meeting devoted to SETI, Frank Drake wrote an equation on the blackboard that took
the difficult question of estimating the number of civilizations in the Galaxy and broke it down into a series
of smaller, more manageable questions. Ever since then, both astronomers and students have used this
Drake equation as a means of approaching the most challenging question: How likely is it that we are
alone? Since this is at present an unanswerable question, astronomer Jill Tarter has called the Drake
equation a “way of organizing our ignorance.” (See Figure 30.21.)
Figure 30.21 Drake Equation. A plaque at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory commemorates the conference where the
equation was first discussed. (credit: NRAO/NSF/AUI)
The form of the Drake equation is very simple. To estimate the number of communicating civilizations that
currently exist in the Galaxy (we will define these terms more carefully in a moment), we multiply the rate of
formation of such civilizations (number per year) by their average lifetime (in years). In symbols,
To make this formula easier to use (and more interesting), however, Drake separated the rate of formation
Rtotal into a series of probabilities:
Rstar is the rate of formation of stars like the Sun in our Galaxy, which is, very roughly, around 10 stars per
year. Each of the other terms is a fraction or probability (less than or equal to 1.0), and the product of all
these probabilities is itself the total probability that each star will have an intelligent, technological,
communicating civilization that we might want to talk to. We have:
•
fp = the fraction of these stars with planets
•
fe = the fraction of the planetary systems that include habitable planets
•
fl = the fraction of habitable planets that actually support life
•
fi = the fraction of inhabited planets that develop advanced intelligence
•
fc = the fraction of these intelligent civilizations that develop science and the technology to build radio
telescopes and transmitters
Each of these factors can be discussed and perhaps evaluated, but we must guess at many of the values. In
particular, we don’t know how to calculate the probability of something that happened once on Earth but
has not been observed elsewhere—and these include the development of life, of intelligent life, and of
technological life (the last three factors in the equation). One important advance in estimating the terms of
30 • Life in the Universe
the Drake equation comes from the recent discovery of exoplanets. When the Drake equation was first
written, no one had any idea whether planets and planetary systems were common. Now we know they
are—another example of the Copernican principle.
Solution
Even if we don’t know the answers, we can make some guesses and calculate the resulting number N. Let’s
start with the optimism implicit in the Copernican principle and set the last three terms equal to 1.0. If R is
10 stars/year and if we measure the average lifetime of a technological civilization in years, the units of
years cancel. If we also assume that fp is 0.1, and fe is 1.0, the equation becomes
Now we see the importance of the term L, the lifetime of a communicating civilization (measured in years).
We have had this capability (to communicate at the distances of the stars) for only a few decades.
Check Your Learning
Suppose we assume that this stage in our history lasts only one century.
Answer:
With our optimistic assumptions about the other factors, L = 100 years and N = 100 such civilizations in the
entire Galaxy. In that case, there are so few other civilizations like ours that we are unlikely to detect any
signals in a SETI search. But suppose the average lifetime is a million years; in that case, there are a million
such civilizations in the Galaxy, and some of them may be within range for radio communication.
The most important conclusion from this calculation is that even if we are extremely optimistic about the
probabilities, the only way we can expect success from SETI is if other civilizations are much older (and
hence probably much more advanced) than ours.
Read Frank Drake’s own account (https://openstax.org/l/30drakeequat) of how he came up with his
“equation.” And here is a recent interview (https://openstax.org/l/30frandrakinter) with Frank Drake by one
of the authors of this textbook.
SETI outside the Radio Realm
For the reasons discussed above, most SETI programs search for signals at radio wavelengths. But in science, if
there are other approaches to answering an unsolved question, we don’t want to neglect them. So
astronomers have been thinking about other ways we could pick up evidence for the existence of
technologically advanced civilizations.
Recently, technology has allowed astronomers to expand the search into the domain of visible light. You might
think that it would be hopeless to try to detect a flash of visible light from a planet given the brilliance of the
star it orbits. This is why we usually cannot measure the reflected light of planets around other stars. The
feeble light of the planet is simply swamped by the “big light” in the neighborhood. So another civilization
would need a mighty strong beacon to compete with their star.
However, in recent years, human engineers have learned how to make flashes of light brighter than the Sun.
The trick is to “turn on” the light for a very brief time, so that the costs are manageable. But ultra-bright, ultrashort laser pulses (operating for periods of a billionth of a second) can pack a lot of energy and can be coded
to carry a message. We also have the technology to detect such short pulses—not with human senses, but
with special detectors that can be “tuned” to hunt automatically for such short bursts of light from nearby
LINK TO LEARNING
30.4 • The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
stars.
Why would any civilization try to outshine its own star in this way? It turns out that the cost of sending an
ultra-short laser pulse in the direction of a few promising stars can be less than the cost of sweeping a
continuous radio message across the whole sky. Or perhaps they, too, have a special fondness for light
messages because one of their senses evolved using light. Several programs are now experimenting with
“optical SETI” searches, which can be done with only a modest telescope. (The term optical here means using
visible light.)
If we let our imaginations expand, we might think of other for technosignatures—signs of technology from
other civilizations. For example, what if a truly advanced civilization should decide to (or need to) renovate its
planetary system to maximize the area for life? It could do so by breaking apart some planets or moons and
building a ring of solid material that surrounds or encloses the star and intercepts some or all of its light. This
huge artificial ring or sphere might glow very brightly at infrared wavelengths, as the starlight it receives is
eventually converted to heat and re-radiated into space. That infrared radiation could be detected by our
instruments, and searches for such infrared sources are also underway (Figure 30.22).
Figure 30.22 Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE). Astronomers have used this infrared satellite to search for infrared
signatures of enormous construction projects by very advanced civilizations, but their first survey did not reveal any. (credit:
modification of work by NASA/JPL-Caltech)
Should We Transmit in Addition to Listening?
Our planet has some leakage of radio waves into space, from FM radio, television, military radars, and
communication between Earth and our orbiting spacecraft. However, such leakage radiation is still quite weak,
and therefore difficult to detect at the distances of the stars, at least with the radio technology we have. So at
the present time our attempts to communicate with other civilizations that may be out there mostly involve
trying to receive messages, but not sending any ourselves.
Some scientists, however, think that it is inconsistent to search for beacons from other civilizations without
announcing our presence in a similar way. (We discussed earlier the problem that if every other civilization
confined itself to listening, no one would ever get in touch.) So, should we be making regular attempts at
sending easily decoded messages into space? Some scientists warn that our civilization is too immature and
30 • Life in the Universe
defenseless to announce ourselves at this early point in our development. The decision whether to transmit or
not turns out to be an interesting reflection of how we feel about ourselves and our place in the universe.
Discussions of transmission also raise the question of who should speak for planet Earth. Today, anyone and
everyone can broadcast radio signals, and many businesses, religious groups, and governments do. It would
be a modest step for the same organizations to use or build large radio telescopes and begin intentional
transmissions that are much stronger than the signals that leak from Earth today. And if we intercept a signal
from an alien civilization, then the issue arises whether to reply.
Who should make the decision about whether, when, and how humanity announces itself to the cosmos? Is
there freedom of speech when it comes to sending radio messages to other civilizations? Do all the nations of
Earth have to agree before we send a signal strong enough that it has a serious chance of being received at
the distances of the stars? How our species reaches a decision about these kinds of questions may well be a
test of whether or not there is intelligent life on Earth.
Conclusion
Whether or not we ultimately turn out to be the only intelligent species in our part of the Galaxy, our
exploration of the cosmos will surely continue. An important part of that exploration will still be the search for
biomarkers from inhabited planets that have not produced technological creatures that send out radio signals.
After all, creatures like butterflies and dolphins may never build radio antennas, but we are happy to share our
planet with them and would be delighted to find their counterparts on other worlds.
Whether or not life exists elsewhere is just one of the unsolved problems in astronomy that we have discussed
in this book. A humble acknowledgment of how much we have left to learn about the universe is one of the
fundamental hallmarks of science. This should not, however, prevent us from feeling exhilarated about how
much we have already managed to discover, and feeling curious about what else we might find out in the
years to come.
Our progress report on the ideas of astronomy ends here, but we hope that your interest in the universe does
not. We hope you will keep up with developments in astronomy through media and online, or by going to an
occasional public lecture by a local scientist. Who, after all, can even guess all the amazing things that future
research projects will reveal about both the universe and our connection with it?
30.4 • The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
Key Terms
amino acids
organic compounds that are the molecular building blocks of proteins
astrobiology
the multidisciplinary study of life in the universe: its origin, evolution, distribution, and fate;
similar terms are exobiology and bioastronomy
biomarker
evidence of the presence of life, especially a global indication of life on a planet that could be
detected remotely (such as an unusual atmospheric composition)
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
a molecule that stores information about how to replicate a cell and its
chemical and structural components
Drake equation
a formula for estimating the number of intelligent, technological civilizations in our Galaxy,
first suggested by Frank Drake
extremophile
an organism (usually a microbe) that tolerates or even thrives under conditions that most of
the life around us would consider hostile, such as very high or low temperature or acidity
gene
the basic functional unit that carries the genetic (hereditary) material contained in a cell
habitable environment
an environment capable of hosting life
habitable zone
the region around a star in which liquid water could exist on the surface of terrestrial-sized
planets, hence the most probable place to look for life in a star’s planetary system
organic compound
a compound containing carbon, especially a complex carbon compound; not necessarily
produced by life
organic molecule
a combination of carbon and other atoms—primarily hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
phosphorus, and sulfur—some of which serve as the basis for our biochemistry
photosynthesis
a complex sequence of chemical reactions through which some living things can use
sunlight to manufacture products that store energy (such as carbohydrates), releasing oxygen as one byproduct
protein
a key biological molecule that provides the structure and function of the body’s tissues and organs,
and essentially carries out the chemical work of the cell
RNA (ribonucleic acid)
a molecule that aids in the flow of genetic information from DNA to proteins
SETI
the search for extraterrestrial intelligence; usually applied to searches for radio signals from other
civilizations
stromatolites
solid, layered rock formations that are thought to be the fossils of oxygen-producing
photosynthetic bacteria in rocks that are 3.5 billion years old
thermophile
an organism that can tolerate high temperatures
Summary
30.1 The Cosmic Context for Life
Life on Earth is based on the presence of a key unit known as an organic molecule, a molecule that contains
carbon, especially complex hydrocarbons. Our solar system formed about 5 billion years ago from a cloud of
gas and dust enriched by several generations of heavier element production in stars. Life is made up of
chemical combinations of these elements made by stars. The Copernican principle, which suggests that there
is nothing special about our place in the universe, implies that if life could develop on Earth, it should be able
to develop in other places as well. The Fermi paradox asks why, if life is common, more advanced life-forms
have not contacted us.
30.2 Astrobiology
The study of life in the universe, including its origin on Earth, is called astrobiology. Life as we know it requires
water, certain elemental raw materials (carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur), energy,
and an environment in which the complex chemistry of life is stable. Carbon-based (or organic) molecules are
abundant in space and may also have been produced by processes on Earth. Life appears to have spread
around our planet within 400 million years after the end of heavy bombardment, if not sooner. The actual
30 • Key Terms
origin of life—the processes leading from chemistry to biology—is not completely understood. Once life took
hold, it evolved to use many energy sources, including first a range of different chemistries and later light, and
diversified across a range of environmental conditions that humans consider “extreme.” This proliferation of
life into so many environmental niches, so relatively soon after our planet became habitable, has served to
make many scientists optimistic about the chances that life could exist elsewhere.
30.3 Searching for Life beyond Earth
The search for life beyond Earth offers several intriguing targets. Mars appears to have been more similar to
Earth during its early history than it is now, with evidence for liquid water on its ancient surface and perhaps
even now below ground. The accessibility of the martian surface to our spacecraft offers the exciting potential
to directly examine ancient and modern samples for evidence of life. In the outer solar system, the moons
Europa and Enceladus likely host vast sub-ice oceans that may directly contact the underlying rocks—a good
start in providing habitable conditions—while Titan offers a fascinating laboratory for understanding the sorts
of organic chemistry that might ultimately provide materials for life. And the last decade of research on
exoplanets leads us to believe that there may be billions of habitable planets in the Milky Way Galaxy. Study of
these worlds offers the potential to find biomarkers indicating the presence of life.
30.4 The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence
Some astronomers are engaged in the search for extraterrestrial intelligent life (SETI). Because other planetary
systems are so far away, traveling to the stars is either very slow or extremely expensive (in terms of energy
required). Despite many UFO reports and tremendous media publicity, there is no evidence that any of these
are related to extraterrestrial visits. Scientists have determined that the best way to communicate with any
intelligent civilizations out there is by using electromagnetic waves, and radio waves seem best suited to the
task. So far, they have only begun to comb the many different possible stars, frequencies, signal types, and
other factors that make up what we call the cosmic haystack problem. Some astronomers are also undertaking
searches for brief, bright pulses of visible light and infrared signatures of huge construction projects by
advanced civilizations. If we do find a signal someday, deciding whether to answer and what to answer may be
two of the greatest challenges humanity will face.
For Further Exploration
Articles
Astrobiology
Chyba, C. “The New Search for Life in the Universe.” Astronomy (May 2010): 34. An overview of astrobiology
and the search for life out there in general, with a brief discussion of the search for intelligence.
Dorminey, B. “A New Way to Search for Life in Space.” Astronomy (June 2014): 44. Finding evidence of
photosynthesis on other worlds.
McKay, C., & Garcia, V. “How to Search for Life on Mars.” Scientific American (June 2014): 44–49. Experiments
future probes could perform.
Reed, N. “Why We Haven’t Found Another Earth Yet.” Astronomy (February 2016): 25. On the search for
smaller earthlike planets in their star’s habitable zones, and where we stand.
Shapiro, R. “A Simpler Origin of Life.” Scientific American (June 2007): 46. New ideas about what kind of
molecules formed first so life could begin.
Simpson, S. “Questioning the Oldest Signs of Life.” Scientific American (April 2003): 70. On the difficulty of
interpreting biosignatures in rocks and the implications for the search for life on other worlds.
30 • For Further Exploration
SETI
Chandler, D. “The New Search for Alien Intelligence.” Astronomy (September 2013): 28. Review of various ways
of finding other civilizations out there, not just radio wave searches.
Crawford, I. “Where Are They?” Scientific American (July 2000): 38. On the Fermi paradox and its resolutions,
and on galactic colonization models.
Folger, T. “Contact: The Day After.” Scientific American (January 2011): 40–45. Journalist reports on efforts to
prepare for ET signals; protocols and plans for interpreting messages; and discussions of active SETI.
Kuhn, J., et al. “How to Find ET with Infrared Light.” Astronomy (June 2013): 30. On tracking alien civilizations by
the heat they put out.
Lubick, N. “An Ear to the Stars.” Scientific American (November 2002): 42. Profile of SETI researcher Jill Tarter.
Nadis, S. “How Many Civilizations Lurk in the Cosmos?” Astronomy (April 2010): 24. New estimates for the
terms in the Drake equation.
Shostak, S. “Closing in on E.T.” Sky & Telescope (November 2010): 22. Nice summary of current and proposed
efforts to search for intelligent life out there.
Websites
Astrobiology
Astrobiology Web: http://astrobiology.com/ (http://astrobiology.com/). A news site with good information and
lots of material.
Exploring Life’s Origins: http://exploringorigins.org/index.html (http://exploringorigins.org/index.html). A
website for the Exploring Origins Project, part of the multimedia exhibit of the Boston Museum of Science.
Explore the origin of life on Earth with an interactive timeline, gain a deeper knowledge of the role of RNA,
“build” a cell, and explore links to learn more about astrobiology and other related information.
History of Astrobiology: https://astrobiology.nasa.gov/about/history-of-astrobiology/
(https://astrobiology.nasa.gov/about/history-of-astrobiology/). By Marc Kaufman, on the NASA
Astrobiology site.
Life, Here and Beyond: https://astrobiology.nasa.gov/about/ (https://astrobiology.nasa.gov/about/). By Marc
Kaufman, on the NASA Astrobiology site.
SETI
Berkeley SETI Research Center: https://seti.berkeley.edu/ (https://seti.berkeley.edu/). The University of
California group has received a $100 million grant from a Russian-American billionaire to begin the
Breakthrough: Listen project, a major step forward in the number of stars and number of radio channels
being searched.
Fermi Paradox: https://www.seti.org/fermi-paradox-0 (https://www.seti.org/fermi-paradox-0). If the Galaxy is
teeming with advanced intelligent life, physicist Fermi asked, why is no one visiting us? This is an
introduction; the much longer Wikipedia page on this topic (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermi_paradox)
has more detailed ideas.
Planetary Society: http://www.planetary.org/explore/projects/seti/ (http://www.planetary.org/explore/
projects/seti/). This advocacy group for exploration has several pages devoted to the search for life.
Reading list: http://bit.ly/ufoskeptic (http://bit.ly/ufoskeptic). If you would like to see the perspective of
scientists and other skeptical investigators on UFO controversies, check out this reading list.
SETI Institute: http://www.seti.org (http://www.seti.org). A key organization in the search for life in the
30 • For Further Exploration
universe; the institute’s website is full of information and videos about both astrobiology and SETI.
SETI: http://www.skyandtelescope.com/tag/seti/ (http://www.skyandtelescope.com/tag/seti/). Sky &
Telescope magazine offers good articles on this topic.
Videos
Astrobiology
Copernicus Complex: Are We Special in the Cosmos?: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ERp0AHYRm_Q
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ERp0AHYRm_Q). A video of a popular-level talk by Caleb Scharf of
Columbia University (1:18:54).
Life at the Edge: Life in Extreme Environments on Earth and the Search for Life in the Universe:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=91JQmTn0SF0 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=91JQmTn0SF0). A
video of a 2009 nontechnical lecture by Lynn Rothschild of NASA Ames Research Center (1:31:21).
Saturn’s Moon Titan: A World with Rivers, Lakes, and Possibly Even Life: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=bbkTJeHoOKY (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bbkTJeHoOKY). A video of a 2011 talk by Chris
McKay of NASA Ames Research Center (1:23:33).
SETI
Allen Telescope Array: The Newest Pitchfork for Exploring the Cosmic Haystack: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=aqsI1HZCgUM (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aqsI1HZCgUM). A 2013 popular-level lecture
by Jill Tarter of the SETI Institute (1:45:55).
Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence: Necessarily a Long-Term Strategy: http://www.longnow.org/
seminars/02004/jul/09/the-search-for-extra-terrestrial-intelligence-necessarily-a-long-term-strategy/
(http://www.longnow.org/seminars/02004/jul/09/the-search-for-extra-terrestrial-intelligence-necessarily-along-term-strategy/). 2004 talk by Jill Tarter at the Long Now Foundation (1:21:13).
The Search for Extra-Terrestrial Life with New Generation Technology: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=R1ndk08vZqM (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R1ndk08vZqM). A briefing in 2020 with Jill
Tarter, Andrew Siemion, and Victoria Meadows on how scientists are currently searching for life, including
intelligent life.
Search for Intelligent Life Among the Stars: New Strategies: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=m9WxW2ktcKU (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m9WxW2ktcKU). A 2010 nontechnical talk by
Seth Shostak of the SETI Institute (1:29:58).
The Breakthrough: Listen Initiative—Our Boldest Effort to Answer our Oldest Question:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQ2sKwwhRgI (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQ2sKwwhRgI). A
talk by Andrew Siemion at Harvard, with some nontechnical and some more technical sections.
Collaborative Group Activities
A.
If one of the rocks from Mars examined by a future mission to the red planet does turn out to have
unambiguous signs of ancient life that formed on Mars, what does your group think would be the
implications of such a discovery for science and for our view of life elsewhere? Would such a discovery
have any long-term effects on your own thinking?
B.
Suppose we receive a message from an intelligent civilization around another star. What does your group
think the implications of this discovery would be? How would your own thinking or personal philosophy be
affected by such a discovery?
C.
A radio message has been received from a civilization around a star 40 light-years away, which contains (in
30 • Collaborative Group Activities
pictures) quite a bit of information about the beings that sent the message. The president of the United
States has appointed your group a high-level commission to advise whether humanity should answer the
message (which was not particularly directed at us, but comes from a beacon that, like a lighthouse,
sweeps out a circle in space). How would you advise the president? Does your group agree on your
answer or do you also have a minority view to present?
D.
If there is no evidence that UFOs are extraterrestrial visitors, why does your group think that television
shows, newspapers, and movies spend so much time and effort publicizing the point of view that UFOs are
craft from other worlds? Make a list of reasons. Who stands to gain by exaggerating stories of unknown
lights in the sky or simply fabricating stories that alien visitors are already here?
E.
Does your group think scientists should simply ignore all the media publicity about UFOs or should they
try to respond? If so, how should they respond? Does everyone in the group agree?
F.
Suppose your group is the team planning to select the most important sights and sounds of Earth to
record and put on board the next interstellar spacecraft. What pictures (or videos) and sounds would you
include to represent our planet to another civilization?
G.
Let’s suppose Earth civilization has decided to broadcast a message announcing our existence to other
possible civilizations among the stars. Your group is part of a large task force of scientists,
communications specialists, and people from the humanities charged with deciding the form and content
of our message. What would you recommend? Make a list of ideas.
H.
Think of examples of contact with aliens you have seen in movies and on TV. Discuss with your group how
realistic these have been, given what you have learned in this class. Was the contact in person (through
traveling) or using messages? Why do you think Hollywood does so many shows and films that are not
based on our scientific understanding of the universe?
I.
Go through the Drake equation with your group and decide on values for each factor in the estimate. (If
you disagree on what a factor should be within the group, you can have a “minority report.”) Based on the
factors, how many intelligent, communicating civilizations do you estimate to be thriving in our Galaxy
right now?
Exercises
Review Questions
1. What is the Copernican principle? Make a list of scientific discoveries that confirm it.
2. Where in the solar system (and beyond) have scientists found evidence of organic molecules?
3. Give a short history of the atoms that are now in your little finger, going back to the beginning of the
universe.
4. What is a biomarker? Give some possible examples of biomarkers we might look for beyond the solar
system.
5. Why are Mars and Europa the top targets for the study of astrobiology?
6. Why is traveling between the stars (by creatures like us) difficult?
7. What are the advantages to using radio waves for communication between civilizations that live around
different stars? List as many as you can.
8. What is the “cosmic haystack problem”? List as many of its components as you can think of.
9. What is a habitable zone?
30 • Exercises
10. Why is the simultaneous detection of methane and oxygen in an atmosphere a good indication of the
existence of a biosphere on that planet?
11. What are two characteristic properties of life that distinguish it from nonliving things?
12. What are the three requirements that scientists believe an environment needs to supply life with in order
to be considered habitable?
13. Can you name five environmental conditions that, in their extremes, microbial life has been challenged by
and has learned to survive on Earth?
Thought Questions
14. Would a human have been possible during the first generation of stars that formed right after the Big
Bang? Why or why not?
15. If we do find life on Mars, what might be some ways to check whether it formed separately from Earth life,
or whether exchanges of material between the two planets meant that the two forms of life have a
common origin?
16. What kind of evidence do you think would convince astronomers that an extraterrestrial spacecraft has
landed on Earth?
17. What are some reasons that more advanced civilizations might want to send out messages to other star
systems?
18. What are some answers to the Fermi paradox? Can you think of some that are not discussed in this
chapter?
19. Why is there so little evidence of Earth’s earliest history and therefore the period when life first began on
our planet?
20. Why was the development of photosynthesis a major milestone in the evolution of life?
21. Does all life on Earth require sunshine?
22. Why is life unlikely to be found on the surface of Mars today?
23. In this chapter, we identify these characteristic properties of life: life extracts energy from its environment,
and has a means of encoding and replicating information in order to make faithful copies of itself. Does
this definition fully capture what we think of as “life”? How might our definition be biased by our
terrestrial environment?
24. Given that no sunlight can penetrate Europa’s ice shell, what would be the type of energy that could make
some form of europan life possible?
25. Why is Saturn’s moon Enceladus such an exciting place to send a mission?
26. In addition to an atmosphere dominated by nitrogen, how else is Saturn’s moon Titan similar to Earth?
27. How can a planet’s atmosphere affect the width of the habitable zone in its planetary system?
28. Why are we limited to finding life on planets orbiting other stars to situations where the biosphere has
created planet-scale changes?
30 • Exercises
Figuring for Yourself
29. Suppose astronomers discover a radio message from a civilization whose planet orbits a star 35 lightyears away. Their message encourages us to send a radio answer, which we decide to do. Suppose our
governing bodies take 2 years to decide whether and how to answer. When our answer arrives there, their
governing bodies also take two of our years to frame an answer to us. How long after we get their first
message can we hope to get their reply to ours? (A question for further thinking: Once communication
gets going, should we continue to wait for a reply before we send the next message?)
30. The light a planet receives from the Sun (per square meter of planet surface) decreases with the square of
the distance from the Sun. So a planet that is twice as far from the Sun as Earth receives (1/2)2 = 0.25 times
(25%) as much light and a planet that is three times as far from the Sun receives (1/3)2 = 0.11 times (11%)
as much light. How much light is received by the moons of Jupiter and Saturn (compared to Earth), worlds
which orbit 5.2 and 9.5 times farther from the Sun than Earth?
31. Think of our Milky Way Galaxy as a flat disk of diameter 100,000 light-years. Suppose we are one of 1000
civilizations, randomly distributed through the disk, interested in communicating via radio waves. How far
away would the nearest such civilization be from us (on average)?
30 • Exercises
